FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR
SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
Abstract. Large language models (LLMs) have shown promise for event log
analysis, but their high computational requirements, reliance on cloud infras-
tructure, and security concerns limit practical deployment. In addition, most
existing approaches focus only on the identification of the problem and do
not provide actionable remediation. Small language models (SLMs) present
a light-weight alternative that can be fine-tuned for a specific purpose and
hosted locally. This paper investigates whether SLMs, when fine-tuned for a
specific task, can serve as a practical alternative for event log analysis while
also generating solutions.
We first create a large-scale synthetic Windows
event log dataset that contains remediation actions using a high-performing
LLM. We then fine-tune multiple SLMs and LLMs using the LoRA parameter-
efficient fine-tuning technique and evaluate their performance by comparing
with expert assessment. The results show that the dataset accurately reflects
real-world scenarios and that fine-tuned SLMs consistently outperform LLMs
in identifying issues and providing relevant remediation, while requiring fewer
computational resources.
1. Introduction
In previous research for event log analysis, researchers have demonstrated that
fine-tuning is one of the most effective methods to adapt language models to specific
tasks [26, 4, 31, 24]. However, fine-tuning comes with two main limitations, which
are high resource requirements and the significant amount of time required to train
language models. In addition, LLMs also have significant requirements. To meet
these requirements, organisations purchase GPUs or, in most cases, they rent them;
both incur high costs.
Furthermore, the tools are restricted to only identifying
problems and do not introduce new features.
This makes it difficult to justify
their use for event log analysis tasks, as most non-LLM-based tools can accurately
complete the same tasks, are free, and commonly accessible desktop machines meet
their resource requirements. Using cloud GPUs to operate the tools is not a suitable
option, and if the fine-tuning dataset contains an oranisation’s event logs, using
them to fine-tune it is also not suitable. This is because the logs will be stored
on the cloud provider’s servers [19], which will be a cyber security threat and a
breach of data confidentiality. Additionally, the motivation for fine-tuning open-
source LLMs is that closed-source LLMs (such as GPT and Claude) are unsuitable
because the logs are sent to the service providers, but if the fine-tuned models
are deployed in cloud-based environments, then they will also share the original
limitation.
Corresponding author: Siraaj.Akhtar@hud.ac.uk.
arXiv:2605.06330v1 [cs.CR] 7 May 2026
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
SLMs (Small Language Models), as implied by their name, are smaller language
models than LLMs, and thus can be deployed on regular machines. Researchers
have demonstrated that they can achieve results comparable to those of their LLM
counterparts in other research fields [17, 14, 25]. In our domain, only one article has
been written that uses SLMs for event log analysis, but this is in combination with
LLMs, not independently [44]. Consequently, our primary objective is to fill this
research gap and assess whether SLMs can perform as well as, or even better than,
LLMs when fine-tuned for event log analysis with a focus on providing solutions to
problems identified, as this was also not explored in prior research.
To achieve this objective, we generate a dataset that represents real-world data,
contains different types of events, includes logs which represent system health,
is in the required format for fine-tuning and includes solutions to logs that were
identified as problematic. We seek to achieve this by providing the model with
real-world logs that cover a range of activities, before generation. Alongside this,
we have secondary objectives within fine-tuning itself, which are to reduce resource
requirements and time taken, and aim to achieve this using the LoRA technique,
whilst still producing an accurate tool.
We conduct two experiments.
In the first experiment, we provide the LLM
(Claude 3.7 Sonnet) with a structured prompt and example logs, and ask it to
generate 10,000 logs in the correct format while providing solutions to problems
that were identified, as the literature mentions that having more than 5000 dataset
entries is the best practice to ensure successful fine-tuning [37]. In the second exper-
iment, we used this dataset to fine-tune the selected models and then provided them
with a testing dataset to evaluate their outputs. To evaluate both experiments, we
asked nine experts (from academia and industry) to complete a questionnaire to
assess whether the generated dataset is suitable and evaluate the performance of
the language models.
The novel contributions of this study are:
• A solution-aware synthetic Windows event-log dataset for fine-
tuning. We construct a large-scale fine-tuning dataset by using real-world
Windows log samples to prompt a high-performing LLM to generate re-
alistic logs and paired problem-identification and remediation outputs, ad-
dressing the common limitation that prior datasets/tools focus on detection
without providing an actionable solution.
• Fine-tuning to include solutions in event-log analysis. We fine-tune
several SLMs and LLMs for Windows event-log analysis and build on prior
research by not only identifying problems but also providing remediation
solutions.
• Human-in-the-loop benchmarking of SLMs vs LLMs on corre-
lated log groups. We evaluate fine-tuned models on a real-world Win-
dows testing set with correlated log groups (via DepCOMM) and use expert
assessment to judge correctness, sufficiency of remediation steps, and prac-
tical interpretability enabling an evidence-based comparison of SLM/LLM
trade-offs specifically for event-log diagnostics.
In addition to the results, we demonstrate that providing the LLM with examples
allowed it to produce realistic event logs, which include a range of different types
of activities, and the experts affirmed that the solutions provided contain sufficient
information regarding how to resolve problems that were identified. Furthermore,

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS3
we also found that using the LoRA fine-tuning technique significantly reduced the
time taken for fine-tuning, allowing us to fine-tune on a lower specification GPU,
and the outputs of the models were still of high quality. In addition, the experts
also found that the SLMs were able to rival, and at times, outperform the LLMs re-
garding identifying problems and providing correct and detailed solutions. This was
evident when the SLM versions of Bloom and Gemma significantly outperformed
the LLM versions.
This paper is structured as follows: Firstly, we review literature related to this
topic, which highlights the importance of our study, in Section 2. Following this, we
outline our research methodology and motivation in Section 3. We then transition
into our two experiments, first generating our dataset in Section 4 and fine-tuning
the LLMs and SLMs in 5. Finally, we present our results and discuss their impli-
cations, limitations and future work in Section 6.
2. Related work
2.1. Fine-tuning. Previous research demonstrates that fine-tuning significantly
improves results for various tasks, including event log analysis. Due to this, we
begin by analysing articles which highlight this trend.
In the research article, [26], the authors compare performance for root cause anal-
ysis between fine-tuned models (MistralLite and Mixtral-87B) and GPT-4. They
successfully demonstrate that MistralLite was able to outperform GPT-4 and even
the larger model, Mixtral-87b.
As a result of this, we can conclude that fine-
tuning is an essential tool to address the limitations of open-source models and that
smaller models are better suited for fine-tuning because fewer parameters need to be
changed. Another study, [4], also justifies the use of fine-tuning. The authors aim
to improve efficiency for deep learning parsers with fine-tuning and online parsing.
As was the case with the previous article, the results demonstrated an improvement
over the prior techniques. A limitation of this study is that the parsing is online,
which presents security concerns, as the logs will be vulnerable to malicious actors
who could intercept them, which can be addressed in future research.
In a recent study, [31], the authors aim to adapt their tool for cloud-based envi-
ronments. To achieve this, Llama-3 8B is fine-tuned, and they achieve near-optimal
scores. To further improve upon this study, future work can explore methods to
reduce the significant costs and time required for fine-tuning. In addition to using
additional techniques, like event log correlation, to further improve accuracy.
Addressing this limitation, [32], uses prompt engineering in combination with
fine-tuning. It is important to note that prior research focused on these techniques
individually, and this study expands upon them by integrating both techniques. As
was the case with all the previous articles we have analysed, the study demonstrated
that their tool was able to significantly improve in performance and outperform a
model from the GPT series. Despite this, the limitation of high costs, both in time
and computation resource, remains. The study, [24], aims to evaluate solutions to
this salient limitation by using PEFT (parameter-efficient fine-tuning) techniques.
This technique differs from traditional fine-tuning as it modifies specific parameters
of the model rather than all of them, resulting in training taking place at a faster
rate and a reduction in the resources required. However, the datasets and models
generated do not represent various issues because the study is restricted to anomaly
detection.
Future work can address this by evaluating PEFT techniques for a
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
comprehensive range of event log analysis tasks by fine-tuning with a comprehensive
dataset. In addition, they can expand to not just identifying binary anomalies but
also identifying the cause of the issues and providing solutions to them.
2.2. Small language models (SLMs). Deploying LLMs locally requires powerful
hardware; therefore, most organisations tend to host them in the cloud.
This
poses security risks and violations of policies and regulations. Recently, researchers
have explored SLMs as an alternative to address the resource limitation.
The
research study, [17], evaluates the Phi series of SLMs and argues that they can, at
times, perform better than larger models. They achieve this by using high-quality
data similar to that found in " textbooks, and their results justify their claim.
Similarly, the research article, [14], aims to produce an SLM which can rival its
LLM counterparts. They use two techniques (model wind tunnel experiments and
the WSD Learning Rate Scheduler) to efficiently and optimally modify how data
is sent to the model and its parameters, respectively, during training. Their results
show that they achieved their objective, highlighting the importance of additional
techniques to bridge the gap in performance.
Moving on, the authors, in the study, [38], conduct a survey on the literature
of SLMs and find that they are especially important in areas where security is a
priority. Hosting LLMs requires a significant number of resources, and as a result,
most developers decide to deploy their models using cloud infrastructure, which
poses security concerns as the data is vulnerable to cyber-attacks and violates cer-
tain policies and laws which prevent data from being shared with external parties.
They highlight how SLMs have not been explored in a wide range of domains, which
they suggest as an avenue for future research.
Finally, we look at a study that is within our domain, [25]. In this article, the
authors combine the use of SLMs with LLMs; the LLM is only used for responses
where the SLM is likely not to understand the logs.
The results showed that
the required resources were reduced while the results remained highly accurate.
However, it is essential to note that this solution still requires a significant amount
of resources, as an LLM is still used. Future work can utilise methods such as
providing high-quality datasets (as mentioned in the article based on the Phi series
of models), which would allow SLMs to be used instead of larger models.
2.3. Event log correlation. Event log correlation refers to collecting all logs that
relate to an event. Some logs may be considered benign if analysed individually,
but if they are present with other logs, they could clearly indicate that malicious
activities have taken place, or are taking place. As a result of this, it is important
to integrate event log correlation into LLM-based tools, as previously, this has been
overlooked.
To begin, in the study, [9], the authors aim to produce a tool which can suc-
cessfully detect software errors using event log-based correlation. They collated
logs within a certain time period that possessed single or multiple "cloud platform
metrics"; their results demonstrated that the tool was able to accurately identify
faults. A similar approach is explored in the research article, [7]. The authors use
Apache Spark and Elastic Search to correlate events based on a range of attributes,
and they conclude that Elastic Search is a superior technique because it is quicker
and more resource-efficient. However, a limitation of these two approaches is that

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS5
some events may have logs which take place at different time periods and therefore
would go undetected by this tool.
We now move on to studies which could address this limitation. In the study, [20],
the authors develop a tool which correlates event logs and can be used by ordinary
users. They use ARM to establish repeated events. The logs are then verified to be
connected if there are matches between the objects within the logs. Finally, the logs
are passed through an algorithm, and a cause-and-effect percentage is generated.
The results show that the tool has a low processing time and consistently has high
accuracy scores. A comparable approach is provided in the article, [23], where the
authors use ‘’Kendall rank correlation and Granger causality tests" to correlate
logs which are repeated and remove them. The results show that they successfully
manage to improve results, and future work can expand to include cyber attacks,
as this study is restricted to redundant logs.
A different approach is taken in the study, [21], where a graph-based approach
is used to eliminate logs. They only use the logs which are in direct proximity and
remove the ones that are spatially nearby. Their results demonstrate the practicality
of their system on real-world data, but, like the previous study, it is limited to
redundant logs. A comprehensive solution is provided in the research article, [41].
Firstly, alerts are correlated based on various attributes. Afterwards, the alerts
are correlated, plotted in a graph, and Monte Carlo Tree Search is used to identify
missing logs for that activity, based on previous alert patterns. The results show
improvement compared to prior research. A limitation of this study is that novel
events may not be detected, as the tool is restricted to previous patterns.
Finally, in the study, [43], the authors used a graph-based approach to group logs.
Their approach is an improvement over prior research, as they merge similar nodes
and edges into "communities". A community is a group of logs which relate to a
single activity, and the authors highlight an improvement in results when compared
to prior research.
2.4. Solutions for limited context window. Applying event correlation to LLM-
based correlation could lead to hallucinations and even errors due to the large
amount of information that exceeds the limited context windows of the models. As
a result of this, we aim to explore some solutions from other domains to inspire our
solution to this problem.
To begin, we examine studies which suggest repeating instructions could resolve
this issue. In the articles [46, 45], the authors introduce this important technique
and repeat instructions when the model is responding to a large prompt, as the
models are likely to hallucinate if they are not reminded of the task that they
should be performing. Future research can utilise this technique to ensure that the
model is consistently reminded of the instructions, thereby reducing the likelihood
of memory drift.
Moving on to solutions that reduce the amount of information sent to the prompt
at a time, in the research article, [13], the authors demonstrate that sending sum-
maries of the text or even just the first and last sentences of it can significantly
improve results. Comparably, in the study, [12], the authors propose externally
storing data. The authors demonstrate that their model produced better results,
even when compared to top-performing models, such as Claude 3.7 Sonnet. Future
research could use this methodology to analyse large pieces of text by sending data
in chunks.
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
Finally, we look at retrieval-based solutions. In the article, [42], the authors aim
to investigate whether searching for external information can serve as an alternative
to large context windows and fine-tuning. The authors demonstrate that an LLM
with a 75% less context window was able to produce high-quality outputs when
compared to a larger, fine-tuned model. A comparative study is conducted in the
article, [47], where the authors aim to investigate different solutions to the limitation
of the limited memory capacity of LLMs.
They find that the best-performing
solution differs between the tasks. However, iterative retrieval consistently performs
the best. Nonetheless, applying this technique to our domain would be challenging.
Log format changes over time, making it difficult to obtain, update and store logs
for retrieval.
2.5. Research gap. The first subsection highlighted the importance of fine-tuning
within our domain, but also the limitations of costs, resource requirements, and that
the solutions are restricted to identifying problems without any additional function-
ality. We then highlighted the effectiveness of SLMs in other domains, the impor-
tance of event log correlation, and potential solutions to sending large amounts
of information to LLMs in other domains. This demonstrates the importance of
our study to extend the functionality of LLM-based event log analysis tools (by
providing mitigation steps, rather than only problem identification) and assessing
whether SLMs are suitable, which addresses the cost and resource limitations.
3. Methodology
3.1. Overview. As illustrated in Figure 1, this study has two main stages. The
first stage is to create a dataset for fine-tuning. Most datasets are small, do not
cover a wide range of events and attacks, do not include logs that incorporate system
health issues, and do not provide solutions to identified problems. Recent studies
have demonstrated that LLMs can be used to produce suitable datasets [48, 22].
In the second stage, we use this dataset to fine-tune a range of SLMs and LLMs
and compare their performance to determine if the SLMs are an alternative for our
domain. Figure 1 illustrates an overview of this paper.
3.2. Motivation for study and objectives. In our survey article [3], we fre-
quently mentioned that closed-source LLMs can not be used as they send data to
the service provider, which is a breach of security. However, even small LLMs have
significant computational requirements and cannot be deployed within most organ-
isations because their machines do not adhere to the resource requirements. Due
to this, cloud providers are used, which is also unsuitable, as the sensitive event log
data will be sent to the cloud providers.
As a result of this, our primary objective is to ensure that our solution is secure.
Recent research [17, 14, 38] has demonstrated that SLMs (which can be deployed
on most local machines) could be used as an alternative to LLMs when trained for
a specific task. In this study, we focus on Windows event logs. We train SLMs and
LLMs and then compare their results for the task, and intend to highlight that the
SLMs can achieve results that are equal to or similar to their LLM counterparts.
LLMs are known for generating human-like text, but event log researchers have
not exploited this. Prior tools are restricted to identifying issues and not providing
solutions to them. It is important to fill this research gap because non-LLM-based

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS7
Real-world log samples (context and examples)
LLM (Claude 3.7 Sonnet) generates 10,000 synthetic Windows event logs
Format to JSONL (Instruction / Input / Output) + LLM labels: Problem Identified
& Remediation
Cyber-security experts evaluate dataset realism & solution sufficiency
Stage 1 - Dataset generation & validation
Solution-aware synthetic dataset (JSONL)
LoRA fine-tuning of SLMs & LLMs cloud GPU for consistency
Real-world testing set split by device sample equal logs (e.g., 20k total)
DepCOMM correlates logs into related groups
Fine-tuned models analyse correlated log groups (supports large groups)
Experts evaluate outputs correctness & remediation quality
Stage 2 - Fine-tuning, correlated testing & benchmarking
Figure 1. Methodology overview: (Stage 1) solution-aware syn-
thetic dataset generation with expert validation; (Stage 2) LoRA
fine-tuning of SLMs/LLMs and expert-evaluated testing on corre-
lated real-world log groups.
tools can accurately identify issues; if our tools only provide the same functionality,
then LLM-based event log analysis could be considered redundant.
3.3. Experiment environment. As we mentioned in the previous subsection,
LLMs have significant resource requirements and cannot be deployed locally. Due
to this, we decided to conduct our main experiment (fine-tuning and testing it) in
a cloud-based environment to ensure consistency. We utilised Runpod [33], which
allows users to rent a GPU and fine-tune directly. We rented a GPU as it allowed
us to use a specific technique of fine-tuning. The GPU used was the A100 PCIe,
as it fulfils the resource requirements of all the models selected.
This does not
contradict our objectives, as the SLMs used could be deployed locally, but if we
decided to use the cloud for LLMs and local machines for the SLMs, our study
would be considered methodologically inconsistent.
3.4. Correlation Tool. The objective of our experiment is not to correlate logs;
however, most research regarding the use of LLMs to perform various event log
analysis tasks analyses logs individually.
Some logs by themselves may not ap-
pear malicious, but if they are accompanied by other logs, then they could clearly
represent attacks. A simple example of this is a DDoS attack, where an action is
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
repeated with the intent to cause a service to be overwhelmed and crash. Most
LLM-based tools would not detect this attack, as the activity itself may not be
malicious, even though the larger group clearly indicates that a DDOS attack is
taking place. The tool we selected for correlation is DepCOMM [43], as it is from a
highly cited research article and covers a range of event logs (such as Windows, An-
droid and Linux), which means that it is suitable for our future research projects.
In addition, it accepts the parsed format of logs, which our fine-tuning and testing
datasets are comprised of.
3.5. Testing details. To perform testing, we selected a real-world dataset con-
taining 20,000 logs (double the size of fine-tuning data) and covers a wide range of
activities [28]. However, the original dataset contains over 600,000 logs. We calcu-
lated that if we were to perform analysis on the original dataset using all models, it
would take approximately 209 days (6 months and 27 days) and cost $7085.43. As
a result, we split the data into seven smaller datasets, based on the seven machines
within the dataset. We calculated that our experiments could be performed within
our budget and time window if the dataset was equal to or less than 20,000 logs,
so we reduced each dataset to 2857 logs. Following this, DepCOMM correlates the
logs, the models perform analysis for the logs within the dataset, and finally, the
experts evaluate the models’ responses, which are then used to determine if the
SLMs were able to identify problems and provide solutions in a manner equal to or
better than the LLMs. Figure 1 illustrates this methodology.
3.6. Expert evaluation. Our results cannot be calculated through mathematical
equations as there is no ground-truth, and solutions to problems identified could
differ, whilst still being correct. Other researchers used experts within the domain
of cyber-security to resolve this issue [11, 1, 26]. Their objective was to determine
if the LLM-based tools would perform analysis in a similar manner to theirs. Our
experiment also utilises this evaluation method; we selected nine experts in the
domain from industry and academia to evaluate the suitability of our dataset and
to assess and compare the responses of the SLMs and LLMs.
4. Dataset Generation
4.1. Justification for generating a dataset. To begin, we analysed a range of
event log datasets (including those used in other research based on using LLMs for
event log analysis) and identified three main limitations that render them unsuitable
for fine-tuning.
The first is size, for fine-tuning, a minimum of 1000 entries is
mentioned; however, to achieve better results, it is better to have over 5000 [37].
Most datasets, such as LogHub, are limited to 2000 logs. In addition to this, the
second limitation is that the datasets are not in JSONL format [30, 27, 16]; the
structure should be [Instruction: . . . , Input: . . . , Output: . . . ]. Furthermore, prior
datasets do not include the steps that can be taken to resolve issues within them.
As a result of all these limitations, it was incumbent upon us to develop our own
dataset.
In our previous studies, we frequently mentioned that event logs are sensitive
data, and as a result, we were unable to request event logs from our institution and
other organisations with which we work alongside to form our dataset. Additionally,
if we were to use our logs from our own machines, it would not be sufficient, as
it would contain a limited range of activities, and to produce an effective tool, a

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS9
comprehensive dataset is required. Due to this, we reached the conclusion that
generating a dataset would be the most suitable option to obtain a dataset that
meets our requirements.
4.2. Why are we using LLMs to generate our dataset? Within the literature,
we found research articles which highlight that powerful closed-source LLMs could
be used to generate high-quality datasets. These, as we have frequently mentioned,
are unsuitable for event log analysis itself, but they are suitable for generating
datasets [30, 27, 16], as they will not encounter sensitive data. Furthermore, it
would not be possible to manually label the entries with their solutions due to time
constraints, and the quality of the solutions could suffer due to fatigue. We decided
to use Claude 3.7 Sonnet as it can be accessed through the OpenRouter API, and
it was shown in our previous paper [2] to be the best performing model.
4.3. Prompt engineering. To ensure that the model produces a dataset that
meets our requirements, we need to provide it with suitable prompts. Notably, we
also found (in our previous study) that prompts need to have the following qualities,
which would also apply to this task: they need to be clear, relevant and specific [39],
specify an identity to the model [34] and provide it with context. As our dataset
generation contains two stages: generating a dataset and labelling it, then putting
it into the correct format, we need two different prompts. The first prompt (for
the first stage) is "You are a Windows event log generator. Generate 9,000 realistic
Windows event logs (including performance from performance monitor, system logs,
and application events) as JSON objects. Each log entry should always have the
following fields: Date/Time, Event ID, Application and Description. All columns
should not include any commas. Include logs as separate entries and do not add
additional columns." The second prompt (for the second stage) is "You are an
event log analyser. Reply only with the text to fill in the output field. Reply only
in the format: Problem Identified..., How to resolve: . . . ,".
Moving on to our implementation details, which are also represented in 1. We
use Claude 3.7 Sonnet (through the OpenRouter API) to generate 10,000 synthetic
event logs in JSON format, using the prompt which was mentioned in the previ-
ous subsection. Secondly, we used DepCOMM to correlate the Windows LogHub
dataset, as this step ensures that correlated groups of logs are represented in the
dataset. This is important because we want our tool to have the ability to analyse
both individual logs and those in groups. The third step is a script which puts the
log into the correct format. It automatically fills in the Instruction column with our
instruction for fine-tuning, as this needs to be the same for all logs, then it places
the log (this will occur for each log) in the Input column. The final part of this
step is where Claude will generate the output statement, again using the relevant
prompt mentioned previously. In the final step, cyber-security experts will review
the dataset and determine if it meets their requirements, which will be elaborated
on in Sections 6 of this paper.
4.4. Dataset characteristics. Prior research has the limitation of generating data
which does not accurately represent real-world scenarios. As we mentioned, context
is important [34], so in addition to the prompt itself, we also send various example
logs from real-world systems, which include system health, various attacks and
normal activity. The primary and distinguishing characteristic of this dataset is
that it includes the solutions to the problematic logs and log groups. Furthermore,
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
Sample Log Input
2019-04-02 03:38:29, EVT1554206309, SystemMonitor
CPU idle: 29.91%, user: 61.03%, interrupt: 0.08%.
Disk writes: 1924988.24 bytes/sec, disk queue length: 0.16.
System behaviour: normal
LLM: Claude 3.7 Sonnet
Generated Log
2024-01-15 10:25:14 | ID=2 | Performance Monitor Processor Time counter exceeded threshold (85%).
Current value: 92%
Generated Solution
Problem Identified: High CPU utilisation detected - Processor Time counter exceeded 85% thresh-
old (current value: 92%).
Recommended Actions:
1) Identify resource-intensive processes
2) Check for runaway processes
3) Consider scaling resources
4) Optimise application code
5) Schedule heavy workloads off-peak
6) Monitor for potential malware
Figure 2. Dataset generation pipeline using an LLM for log syn-
thesis and remediation guidance.
we include logs that are relevant to a range of event log analysis tasks, as previous
datasets are restricted to one task. Prior research and datasets did not include
this, but it is an important feature to prevent redundancy in LLM-based event log
literature and harness the full capabilities of the models.
4.5. Cost and time. The total costs from using the OpenRouter interface to
request Claude 3.7 Sonnet for both steps were $23.02, and the total time taken was
14 hours.
4.6. Example pipeline. In Figure 2, we use example data to demonstrate how we
generated our dataset. To begin, a sample real-world log is sent to the LLM (Claude
3.7 Sonnet). In our example, there is a log relating to system health, which shows
that the system is in a healthy state because CPU utilisation is at an acceptable
level. The objective of this is for Claude to generate logs which represent both
good and poor system health. Following this, we show that Claude was successfully
able to generate a dataset entry that represents poor system health, as the CPU
utilisation is above the threshold.
Subsequently, Claude was able to provide a
detailed six-step plan of how to resolve the issue, which will teach the models how
to respond to such issues if they were to occur. The amount of detail provided in
the solution is important to ensure that when the dataset is used for fine-tuning,
the model can understand it and provide correct solutions. If the amount of detail
is minimal, the models may not understand how to resolve the issue and produce
incorrect solutions to the problems that were identified.

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
5. Fine-tuning
5.1. Motivation. In our previous research articles, we highlighted that fine-tuning
is the best-performing LLM technique. Other techniques can help to improve re-
sults, but if they are used without fine-tuning, results significantly decrease. As
a result of this, we selected it as our main tool for this experiment. Fine-tuning
has significant resource requirements, and as we mentioned previously, cloud plat-
forms are typically used, which are costly. In addition, the time taken to perform
fine-tuning is high [5]. Due to this, we will also attempt to reduce costs, computa-
tional requirements, and time taken while maintaining the accurate identification
of problems and their solutions.
Furthermore, we aim to evaluate if SLMs can be used as an alternative to LLMs,
as we also mentioned in our methodology section. We intend to select a range of
SLMs and LLMs, compare them and highlight that SLMs can perform equal to
or even better than LLMs when they are trained to identify issues and provide
solutions for a specific event log analysis task, in this case, Windows event logs.
This will pave the way for future research where multiple SLM iterations can be
developed, for different types of event logs, and then they can be linked together and
analysed by one tool. This is how we aim to achieve the second novel contribution
of this paper.
5.2. Model selection. To begin, we will relay the SLMs that were chosen for this
study, as well as justify our choices. The first model is BTLM 3b; this model was
chosen as research demonstrated that it was able to perform like a 7b (the size of
small LLMs) model [6]. The second model that was chosen was Bloom 4b. This is
primarily because it also has a 7b version, which will allow us to compare SLM and
LLM models from the same series directly. Likewise, Gemma 3 4b was selected as
it is the SLM form of the first LLM selected.
Moving on, as we mentioned, Gemma 3 7b is the first LLM selected, as in our
previous research article [3], the results illustrated that it was the best-performing
LLM. Bloom 7b was selected as it has an SLM form and was shown in prior research
to perform well [8]. Finally, Mistral 7b was selected as it was also a high-performing
model from our previous comparison paper. All the LLMs selected are 7b as in our
previous papers; these models were shown to outperform those that were larger
than them, and larger models would require more powerful GPUs, which would not
allow us to be able to complete our experiments within our budget.
5.3. LoRA fine-tuning. To achieve our aim of reducing resource requirements
and time taken for fine-tuning, we selected the LoRA fine-tuning technique. This is
important, as prior event log analysis research has yet to evaluate this technique for
multiple event log analysis tasks (it is only restricted to anomaly detection), despite
it being shown to be effective in other domains.
LoRA fine-tuning differs from
regular fine-tuning as it modifies low-rank matrices rather than the full matrices,
which would be significantly larger.
Researchers have shown that this is more
effective than regular fine-tuning, as its performance does not decrease and the
model is less likely to forget information [35, 40, 36].
5.4. Implementation details. Now, we will discuss our implementation details.
We will begin with the batch size, which was 16 for the SLMs and 4 for the LLMs,
except Bloom 7b, as it was reduced to 2, as it caused the GPU to crash. All models
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
had 3 epochs, and they differed in maximum token length as each model had specific
requirements. The rest of the implementation was the same for all models.
5.5. Testing details. The testing details, however, differ as there is a pre-detection
method for the SLMs to aid them in achieving better results. This feature is de-
signed to detect a range of attacks, including ransomware, brute-force, privilege
escalation, and various software failures. This is to enhance their results and re-
quires an insignificant amount of processing power, so it will not conflict with our
objectives.
Other than this, the testing script used is the same (for SLMs and
LLMs) and sends a system prompt requesting the models to reply with whether a
problem was identified; if one is, then they are asked to provide a solution.
In addition, we introduced a method to handle large groups of logs, as they
are currently unable to do so due to their limited context window. This idea was
inspired by the following research articles [49, 50], which use a similar method but
for large amounts of text. This method is executed if there are more than 7 logs in
a group, where it will send the previous response of the model and ask it to update
its response if there is any additional information; if not, it will keep it the same,
and only the final response will be emitted for that group. As was the case with
our dataset, experts will be used to evaluate the responses of the models, and this
analysis will be used to compare the models, leading to a conclusion on whether we
reached our objectives.
6. Results and discussion
In this section, we will discuss our results. All of the completed forms, as well
as the complete summary charts (which contain all of the results), are publicly
available.
6.1. Results summary tables. A large number of questions were asked to the
experts, and there were two evaluation methods: the first was a score out of 5,
and the second was whether they agreed (yes) or disagreed (no) with the question
asked. To aid the reader, we present our results in tables organised by experiment
and evaluation method.
Table 1 contains all of the responses to the questions
relating to our generated dataset to determine whether it is suitable. The results
for the fine-tuned models after analysing the testing dataset are split into two
tables. Table 3 illustrates where the response to questions is a score out of 5, and
Table 2 is where the responses indicate the extent to which the experts agree with
the question. In addition to this, Figure 3 compiles all of the figures relating to
individual questions, which will be expanded upon in the following sections.
Question
Yes (%)
Somewhat (%)
No (%)
Q1
0
Q2
44.4
55.6
Q3
0
Q4
0
Q5
89.9
11.1
Q6
66.7
33.3
Q7
88.9
11.1
Q8
0
Table 1. Expert evaluation responses for our generated dataset.

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
BTLM-3b
Gemma 4b
Bloom 4b
Mistral 7b
Gemma 7b
Bloom 7b
Q
Yes(%)
Some(%)
No(%)
Yes(%)
Some(%)
No(%)
Yes(%)
Some(%)
No(%)
Yes(%)
Some(%)
No(%)
Yes(%)
Some(%)
No(%)
Yes(%)
Some(%)
No(%)
Q10
33.3
33.3
33.3
77.8
22.2
11.1
55.6
33.3
88.9
11.1
44.4
55.6
33.3
11.1
55.6
Q11
44.4
33.3
22.2
77.8
22.2
22.2
55.6
22.2
77.8
22.2
44.4
11.1
44.4
22.2
11.1
66.7
Q12
55.6
11.1
33.3
66.7
33.3
44.4
22.2
33.3
77.8
11.1
11.1
44.4
11.1
44.4
11.1
22.2
66.7
Q14
66.7
22.2
11.1
88.9
11.1
44.4
44.4
11.1
88.9
11.1
55.6
44.4
33.3
11.1
55.6
Q15
66.7
33.3
77.8
22.2
66.7
11.1
22.2
22.2
11.1
66.7
33.3
66.7
11.1
11.1
77.8
Q16
66.7
33.3
66.7
33.3
55.6
33.3
11.1
22.2
77.8
22.2
11.1
66.7
11.1
11.1
77.8
Table
2. Fine-tuned
models’
expert
evaluation
scores
for
yes/somewhat/no questions.
Question
BTLM-3b
Gemma 4b
Bloom 4b
Mistral 7b
Gemma 7b
Bloom 7b
Q9
2.89
4.22
2.22
4.11
2.00
1.78
Q13
3.33
2.33
4.11
1.78
3.56
3.89
Table 3. Fine-tuned models’ expert evaluation scores for 1-5 rat-
ing questions.
Questionnaire items.
• Q1: Does the template entry below meet the correct JSONL format?
• Q2: Is the instruction for fine-tuning correct?
• Q3: Are the event logs throughout the dataset comprehensive (represent
various system activities, attacks and system health)?
• Q4: Are problems correctly identified?
• Q5: Are the solutions to problems identified, correct?
• Q6: Do they contain enough information for someone to resolve the issue?
• Q7: In the final entries (last 4) are correlated groups of logs, that vary in
sizes. Is the output (problem identified/not and how to resolve) correct?
• Q8: For the correlated logs, are all relevant events in the specific groups?
• Q9: In a general sense, how accurate are the models in identifying issues?
• Q10: Did the outputs make sense?
• Q11: Were the solutions for problems identified correct?
• Q12: Is the information given to resolve issues sufficient?
• Q13: How many of the responses contained hallucinations? (the lower the
score, the lower the amount of hallucinations)
• Q14: If there were hallucinations, were you still able to understand the
responses?
• Q15: Was the model able to handle large groups of event logs?
• Q16: For large groups of event logs, did the responses take into account all
of the events?
6.2. Suitability of using expert evaluation. Both the generated dataset and
the testing datasets are large. In addition, our testing dataset lacks ground truth,
and there is no suitable mechanism to assess whether the outputs are correct and of
good quality. Furthermore, the main author of this paper could not evaluate them
himself because the results may be biased. Due to these factors, using experts to
evaluate experiments of this nature is the only viable option. The experts evaluated
the outputs in a general sense, as they could not be expected to analyse the logs in
their entirety, which comes with the limitation that the results do not represent the
logs as a whole and are instead a thorough observation. Additionally, the experts
could experience fatigue as this is a mundane task; because of this, there is a chance
that some of their responses could be incorrect. For example, a clear observation
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
is that Gemma 7b and Bloom 7b hallucinated severely, but a small number of
experts said they did not. Future researchers can build upon this by significantly
reducing the size of testing datasets whilst ensuring that they contain a range of
activities. This could be achieved by randomly selecting logs from different time
periods within a dataset. Another approach could be dividing the testing dataset
into different parts and assigning experts to them rather than the entire dataset.
6.3. Evaluation of instruction for fine-tuning. The instruction was consistent
across the fine-tuning dataset, as we do not require the fine-tuned models to do any
other tasks. The results from the experts were unanimous (highlighted in Figure 4),
which were that the instruction was fit for purpose, as it clearly specified a task
and identity to the model, which meets the requirements. However, a considerable
number of them mentioned that the use of the term "computational issues" was
overly restrictive, as we required the models to identify a broad range of problems,
and this statement could restrict it to only system health-related issues.
As a
result of this, in our future research, we will refine this by either removing the term
"computational" or by introducing other terms, such as security and authentication
issues, alongside it.
6.4. Using a LLM to generate a fine-tuning dataset. Our results clearly
demonstrate that using an LLM to generate an event log dataset was successful
in our domain. The experts consistently gave the generated dataset high scores;
they agreed that it represented a diverse range of activities, correctly identified
issues and gave detailed responses on how to resolve issues for problems that were
identified. This shows that it meets our primary objective of providing solutions
where relevant, and secondly, it accurately represents logs that could be generated
with real-world systems.
6.5. Evaluation of instruction for fine-tuning. Previously, we mentioned that
we provided the LLM with example logs to ensure that it produced realistic logs
that covered a range of events. Our results highlighted that this was successful;
the main author expanded upon this by further questioning some of the experts.
The experts mentioned that the logs were structured consistently, and the type of
log attribute appeared at the beginning, and this is illustrated in Figure 5. They
were able to look through the logs and see that this attribute regularly changed
throughout the dataset. These changes included (but were not limited to) security
events, performance monitoring, authentication events, errors, power, service con-
trol management and disk management. This is of interest as people are sceptical
about using LLMs for generating event log datasets, as they predict that they will
not create realistic logs, and they will be limited to a small range of events. Our
study shows this concern was not the case. Furthermore, the study highlights the
importance of providing the LLM with examples because we were able to ensure
that the model produced responses that had the amount of detail that was required,
whilst remaining on task and not hallucinating.
6.6. Generating problem identified/resolved statements. Manually gener-
ating output responses for a dataset and identifying problems within the logs would
be close to impossible due to the large magnitude of logs and the high risk of fa-
tigue, and as a result, the primary contribution of this paper is to address this
concern. The experts agreed that the model was successfully able to identify issues

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
and produce outputs that would help users to resolve them (this is highlighted in
Figure 6). This was consistent throughout the dataset (for the different types of
event logs), and when the model had to analyse large groups of logs, it was able
to do so without a drop in performance. The main author also questioned some of
the experts on this topic, and they affirmed that the responses were detailed, did
not contain unnecessary information, and the steps given could be understood and
utilised by people who lack technical expertise to resolve the issues. In addition,
they mentioned the outputs often were a numbered list, which aids users because of
high lucidity. The significantly high results within this experiment are due to the
speciality of LLMs to generate text-based data, and an argument can be made that
this is the event log analysis task that LLMs are best suited to. This is an impor-
tant conclusion, as it affirms our theory that the large and high-performing LLMs
can be used to produce a detailed dataset that includes solutions to the problems
within it for event log analysis.
Language Model
Time Taken (h:min)
BTLM-3b
1:13
Gemma 4b
0:53
Bloom 4b
0:35
Mistral 7b
0:35
Gemma 7b
1:13
Bloom 7b
1:01
Table 4. Table detailing the time taken for fine-tuning.
6.7. Reduction of time taken and resources required with LoRA fine-
tuning. Significant amounts of literature mentioned that fine-tuning for event log
analysis tasks took multiple hours [18, 3]. However, none of the literature mentions
specific time values. This conclusion is also supported by studies in other fields
where large numbers of users reported that regular fine-tuning took "between a
few hours to seven days" [15, 29, 10].
As a result of this, one of our primary
objectives was to significantly reduce the time taken by using the LoRA fine-tuning
technique. Table 4 demonstrates that there was a significant reduction compared to
regular fine-tuning for event log analysis-related tasks. Additionally, we successfully
executed our experiments on a lower-specification GPU compared to what would
be required for regular fine-tuning. This was also even though our dataset entries
were larger due to the problem-identified statements and their solutions compared
to prior datasets, which were analogous to boolean values. These are important
findings, as time can be saved by utilising this technique, as well as costs, as lower-
specification GPUs will be less expensive to rent or purchase. Furthermore, the
experts found that the responses of the models that could respond correctly were
realistic, which highlights that the use of this technique does not reduce accuracy
in event log analysis tasks.
6.8. Time taken to analyse testing dataset. We will begin by analysing the
time taken for the SLMs (rounding up to the nearest hour), which is demonstrated
in Table 5. This was the only category of our results where the LLMs outperformed
the SLMs. This is an interesting conclusion, as our study shows the opposite of
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
Language Model
Time Taken (days:h)
BTLM-3b
3:02
Gemma 4b
0:19
Bloom 4b
3:17
Mistral 7b
0:19
Gemma 7b
0:05
Bloom 7b
1:14
Table 5. Table detailing the time taken for testing.
research papers within other domains, where the SLMs tend to be quicker. This
could be explained by the level of complexity of event log analysis. A step to address
this in the future could be to train the SLMs for specific types of event logs (even
within an operating system), then use an agentic framework to provide a single
interface to users.
6.9. Groups which contain a large number of event logs. Another important
evaluation metric was whether the models could analyse large groups of logs. As
we mentioned previously, there are logs that, when analysed individually, will not
indicate a problem, but if part of a group, they will.
If models are unable to
analyse large groups of event logs, then they would be unsuitable for event log
analysis because these events would go undetected, which poses a serious risk to
system health and security. Our results in Figures 7 and 8 demonstrate that the
SLMs were able to analyse large groups of event logs, but all the LLMs (including
Mistral 7b) were unable to analyse groups of logs that were larger than 7. The
most plausible explanation for this is that the larger models are prioritising the
instruction given to them rather than the previous response. This means that when
they are instructed to either update the previous response with new information or
keep it the same, they apply this to the instruction only, and the original prompt
is disregarded after the first iteration. This is an important finding, as in a major
category of our evaluation, the SLMs considerably outperform the LLMs in the
domain of event log analysis.
6.10. Model outputs. The evaluation form given to the experts contained a com-
prehensive set of questions to gather information about the output quality of the
models. To begin, we will analyse information on whether the outputs made sense.
This is an important metric as the problem-identified statements and solutions
need to make sense for users and security personnel to act upon them. As seen in
Figure 9, the experts agreed that Gemma 4b’s outputs made sense and were the
best out of the SLMs; on the other hand, BTLM-3b and Bloom 4b largely made
sense, but at times they did not. The experts unanimously agreed that Mistral
7b’s responses did make sense, but they were conflicted regarding Gemma 7b and
Bloom 7b. Further analyse into the outputs and questioning some of the experts
leads us to conclude that these two models often hallucinated severely and produced
outputs that the experts questioned mentioned were the worst observed in this ex-
periment. It is important to note that the pre-detection method rarely detected
issues, and thus its impact was negligible. The experts mentioned that there were
no differences between when an issue was pre-detected and when it was not.

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
Adhering to the theme of hallucinations, we will discuss their frequency and
impact. As demonstrated in figures 10 and 11, the experts agreed that Gemma
4b and Mistral 7b had little to no hallucinations, and if they occurred, they could
still understand the outputs. Bloom 4b and BTLM-3b often hallucinated, but the
experts were still able to understand their outputs, as these hallucinations were a
repetition of the input logs after the problem was identified, and solution statements
were not within the statements themselves. On the other hand, as we mentioned
previously, Gemma 7b and Bloom 7b severely hallucinated and often did not provide
a relevant response to the logs provided.
Moving on, the same trend is also observed concerning correctly identifying is-
sues. As demonstrated in Figures 12 and 13. For the SLMs, Gemma 4b was able
to identify issues correctly and produce solutions that made sense, whereas Bloom
4b and BTLM 4b were slightly behind the model in this regard. For the LLMs
Mistral 7b also identified issues correctly, and the solutions were in slightly more
detail compared to Gemma 4b, whereas the other two LLMs were severely deficient
in both, correctly identifying issues and providing detailed solutions.
As a result of this, we reach a surprising conclusion, which is that the SLMs
(in general) produced better outputs compared to the LLMs for this task. This is
because Bloom 7b and Gemma 7b consistently underperformed in all the categories
that were analysed, and Gemma 4b was able to rival Mistral 7b in everything except
for a slight decrease in output quality (whilst still being sufficient to resolve the
issues and making sense). Another important conclusion is that we compared the
SLM and LLM versions of Bloom and Gemma and found that the SLM versions
produced better outputs. This could be because the larger models require a larger
dataset to understand the task, whereas the smaller models have fewer parameters
to change and can successfully learn with a small dataset. This is an important
conclusion, as prior research into SLMs for event log analysis was limited to a single
article where a model was used to aid an LLM, but our paper demonstrates that
it is the better option, as our study affirms that a smaller dataset can be used
successfully with SLMs for event log analysis tasks.
6.11. Best-performing model. To conclude, we found that our objectives were
met as the SLMs were shown to outperform the LLMs in all of our evaluation
criteria, except for time taken, which could be addressed by splitting the tasks
across multiple agents. Gemma 4b is the best-performing model, as it produced
clear outputs that had little to no hallucinations and was able to analyse the large
group of logs. There were only two disadvantages: the first was that the solutions
it produced were slightly less detailed than Mistral, but were still sufficient and
easy to understand. The second disadvantage was that it was not able to analyse
the complete dataset, but this was likely since it was our last experiment and the
GPU had been running for a considerable amount of time. In addition, this could
be easily resolved by restarting the model and resuming the analysis.
6.12. Example pipeline. In Figure 14, the pipeline for the fine-tuned Gemma 4b
model is demonstrated. Firstly, the dataset was used to teach the model how to
perform the task. Following fine-tuning, the testing dataset was sent to the model,
and we highlight a problematic log that was present within the testing dataset.
The model was able to identify that this was an issue and provided a detailed set
of instructions to aid the user in resolving it. In addition, this set of instructions
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
contains a description of the issue and how the suggestions resolve it. This will
prevent users from making mistakes and could also help prevent a recurrence.
7. Conclusion and future work
In conclusion, we aimed to address the limitations of high resource consumption
in fine-tuning and LLMs, and to expand research by producing a comprehensive tool
that provides mitigative steps to address identified problems, rather than merely
identifying them. To achieve these objectives, we generated a dataset which covered
a wide range of activities, was akin to that which would be found in the real world,
and included statements detailing the problems identified and providing clear steps
to resolve them. In addition, we use the LoRA fine-tuning technique on a range
of SLMs and LLMs to assess if SLMs could be used as an alternative, as they
do not require high specification devices. We used experts to evaluate both the
generated dataset and the fine-tuned models’ responses. The experts found that
the generated dataset depicted real-world activities, correctly identified problems
and provided detailed responses when problems were identified. For the second
experiment, the experts made a surprising discovery, which was that the SLMs
significantly outperformed the LLMs. This was clearly illustrated when comparing
the SLM versions of Gemma and Bloom to their LLM counterparts. These points
highlight that we successfully achieved our objective of expanding event log analysis
research using language models by providing solutions to the problems identified,
whilst reducing resource requirements and consumption.
To further progress research, there are clear avenues that could be explored in
future work. The first is to leverage the findings of this paper and produce multiple
SLMs that are fine-tuned for specific types of event logs (for example, network logs
or different operating systems such as Linux) in an agentic framework, which means
that a singular event log analysis tool is required across an organisation. In addition,
the limitations of the models’ responses could be addressed (such as the input
logs being repeated in the output) by modifying the components of LoRA. Lastly,
future research could further enhance the applicability of the proposed solution by
developing a feature that allows the model to implement the provided solutions on
behalf of and with the permission of users to mitigate the identified issues.
References
[1] Mohiuddin Ahmed, Jinpeng Wei, and Ehab Al-Shaer. Prompting llm to enforce and validate
cis critical security control. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Symposium on Access Control
Models and Technologies, pages 93-104, 2024.
[2] Siraaj Akhtar, Saad Khan, and Simon Parkinson. Evaluating prompt engineering for event
log parsing with large language models: A comparative study. Available at SSRN 5351870,
2025.
[3] Siraaj Akhtar, Saad Khan, and Simon Parkinson. Llm-based event log analysis techniques:
A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00677, 2025.
[4] Xiaolei Chen, Jie Shi, Jia Chen, Peng Wang, and Wei Wang. High-precision online log pars-
ing with large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings, pages 354-355, 2024.
[5] Kenneth Ward Church, Zeyu Chen, and Yanjun Ma. Emerging trends: A gentle introduction
to fine-tuning. Natural Language Engineering, 27(6):763-778, 2021.
[6] Nolan Dey, Daria Soboleva, Faisal Al-Khateeb, Bowen Yang, Ribhu Pathria, Hemant
Khachane, Shaheer Muhammad, Robert Myers, Jacob Robert Steeves, Natalia Vassilieva,
et al. Btlm-3b-8k:
7b parameter performance in a 3b parameter model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.11568, 2023.

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
[7] Cl´emence Dubuc. A real-time log correlation system for security information and event man-
agement, 2021.
[8] Nghia Duong-Trung, Xia Wang, and Miloˇs Kravˇc´ık. Bloomllm: Large language models based
question generation combining supervised fine-tuning and bloom’s taxonomy. In European
Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning, pages 93-98. Springer, 2024.
[9] Mostafa Farshchi, Jean-Guy Schneider, Ingo Weber, and John Grundy. Metric selection and
anomaly detection for cloud operations using log and metric correlation analysis. Journal of
Systems and Software, 137:531-549, 2018.
[10] Glean AI Glossary. Fine tuning: Definition and explanation in ai & machine learning. https:
//www.glean.com/ai-glossary/fine-tuning, n.d.
[11] Arthur Hermann. Gpt powered log analysis: Enhancing soc decision making for malicious
and benign security log classification. B.S. thesis, University of Twente, 2024.
[12] Matthew Ho, Chen Si, Zhaoxiang Feng, Fangxu Yu, Yichi Yang, Zhijian Liu, Zhiting Hu,
and Lianhui Qin. Arcmemo: Abstract reasoning composition with lifelong llm memory. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.04439, 2025.
[13] Peyman Hosseini, Ignacio Castro, Iacopo Ghinassi, and Matthew Purver. Efficient solutions
for an intriguing failure of llms: Long context window does not mean llms can analyze long
sequences flawlessly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01866, 2024.
[14] Shengding Hu, Yuge Tu, Xu Han, Chaoqun He, Ganqu Cui, Xiang Long, Zhi Zheng, Yewei
Fang, Yuxiang Huang, Weilin Zhao, et al. Minicpm: Unveiling the potential of small language
models with scalable training strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06395, 2024.
[15] Hugging Face Community Forum. Estimating training time for fine tuning. 
huggingface.co/t/estimating-training-time-for-fine-tuning/1808, 2020.
[16] Asril Jarin, Agung Santosa, and Yaniasih Yaniasih. Using llm to convert bahasa indone-
sia commands into json structures for gis system api. In 2024 International Conference on
Computer, Control, Informatics and its Applications (IC3INA), pages 394-399. IEEE, 2024.
[17] Mojan Javaheripi, S´ebastien Bubeck, Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Sebastien Bubeck, Caio
C´esar Teodoro Mendes, Weizhu Chen, Allie Del Giorno, Ronen Eldan, Sivakanth Gopi, et al.
Phi-2: The surprising power of small language models. Microsoft Research Blog, 1(3):3, 2023.
[18] Egil Karlsen, Xiao Luo, Nur Zincir-Heywood, and Malcolm Heywood. Benchmarking large
language models for log analysis, security, and interpretation. Journal of Network and Sys-
tems Management, 32(3):59, 2024.
[19] Md Imran Khan. Managing threats in cloud computing: A cybersecurity risk mitigation
framework. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 15(5), 2025.
[20] Saad Khan and Simon Parkinson. Causal connections mining within security event logs. In
Proceedings of the 9th Knowledge Capture Conference, pages 1-4, 2017.
[21] Satoru Kobayashi, Kazuki Otomo, Kensuke Fukuda, and Hiroshi Esaki. Mining causality
of network events in log data. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
15(1):53-67, 2017.
[22] Xinyu Li, Yingtong Huo, Chenxi Mao, Shiwen Shan, Yuxin Su, Dan Li, and Zibin Zheng.
Anomalygen: An automated semantic log sequence generation framework with llm for anom-
aly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12250, 2025.
[23] Zhong Li and Matthijs van Leeuwen. Feature selection for fault detection and prediction
based on event log analysis. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 24(2):96-104, 2022.
[24] Ying Fu Lim, Jiawen Zhu, and Guansong Pang. Adapting large language models for
parameter-efficient log anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08045, 2025.
[25] Lipeng Ma, Weidong Yang, Yixuan Li, Ben Fei, Mingjie Zhou, Shuhao Li, Sihang Jiang,
Bo Xu, and Yanghua Xiao. Adaptivelog: An adaptive log analysis framework with the col-
laboration of large and small language model. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
and Methodology, 2025.
[26] Aswath Mandakath Gopinath. Root cause prediction from log data using large language
models, 2024.
[27] Baranidharan Manibalan, J Angel Arul Jothi, and V Mary Anita Rajam. Commandsense:
Actions-objects-results prediction from natural language commands using fine-tuned gpt-3.5
turbo. In 2024 IEEE 3rd World Conference on Applied Intelligence and Computing (AIC),
pages 75-80. IEEE, 2024.
[28] Mehul
Katara.
Windows
event
log
dataset.

mehulkatara/windows-event-log, 2025.
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
[29] Microsoft Q&A. How long does it typically take to train a dataset for a single pdf when
fine-tuning a model with azure ai?, 2024.
[30] Andrea Blasi N´unez, Lukas Paul Achatius Galke, and Peter Schneider-Kamp. Mldataforge:
Accelerating large-scale dataset preprocessing and access for multimodal foundation model
training. RANLP 2025, page 175, 2025.
[31] Diego Frazatto Pedroso, Lu´ıs Almeida, Lucas Eduardo Gulka Pulcinelli, William Aki-
hiro Alves Aisawa, Inˆes Dutra, and Sarita Mazzini Bruschi. Anomaly detection and root
cause analysis in cloud-native environments using large language models and bayesian net-
works. IEEE Access, 2025.
[32] Hengyi Ren, Kun Lan, Zhi Sun, and Shan Liao. Clogllm: A large language model enabled
approach to cybersecurity log anomaly analysis. In 2024 4th International Conference on
Electronic Information Engineering and Computer Communication (EIECC), pages 963-
970. IEEE, 2024.
[33] Runpod. Runpod.  2025.
[34] Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Junqi Dai, and Xipeng Qiu. Character-llm: A trainable agent for
role-playing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10158, 2023.
[35] Reece Shuttleworth, Jacob Andreas, Antonio Torralba, and Pratyusha Sharma. Lora vs full
fine-tuning: An illusion of equivalence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21228, 2024.
[36] Chunlin Tian, Zhan Shi, Zhijiang Guo, Li Li, and Cheng-Zhong Xu. Hydralora: An asym-
metric lora architecture for efficient fine-tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 37:9565-9584, 2024.
[37] Inacio Vieira, Will Allred, S´eamus Lankford, Sheila Castilho, and Andy Way. How much data
is enough data?
fine-tuning large language models for in-house translation: Performance
evaluation across multiple dataset sizes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03454, 2024.
[38] Fali Wang, Zhiwei Zhang, Xianren Zhang, Zongyu Wu, Tzuhao Mo, Qiuhao Lu, Wanjing
Wang, Rui Li, Junjie Xu, Xianfeng Tang, et al. A comprehensive survey of small language
models in the era of large language models: Techniques, enhancements, applications, col-
laboration with llms, and trustworthiness. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology, 2024.
[39] Li Wang, Xi Chen, XiangWen Deng, Hao Wen, MingKe You, WeiZhi Liu, Qi Li, and Jian Li.
Prompt engineering in consistency and reliability with the evidence-based guideline for llms.
npj Digital Medicine, 7(1):41, 2024.
[40] Xi Wang, Laurence Aitchison, and Maja Rudolph. Lora ensembles for large language model
fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00035, 2023.
[41] Yifeng Wang, Yuanbo Guo, and Chen Fang. An end-to-end method for advanced persistent
threats reconstruction in large-scale networks based on alert and log correlation. Journal of
Information Security and Applications, 71:103373, 2022.
[42] Peng Xu, Wei Ping, Xianchao Wu, Lawrence McAfee, Chen Zhu, Zihan Liu, Sandeep Sub-
ramanian, Evelina Bakhturina, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. Retrieval meets
long context large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03025, 2023.
[43] Zhiqiang Xu, Pengcheng Fang, Changlin Liu, Xusheng Xiao, Yu Wen, and Dan Meng. De-
pcomm: Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation. In 2022 IEEE
symposium on security and privacy (SP), pages 540-557. IEEE, 2022.
[44] Youcheng Yan, Jinshuo Liu, Donghong Ji, Jinguang Gu, Ahmed Abubakar Aliyu, Xinyan
Wang, and Jeff Z Pan. Collaborate slm and llm with latent answers for event detection.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 305:112684, 2024.
[45] Raquib Bin Yousuf, Aadyant Khatri, Shengzhe Xu, Mandar Sharma, and Naren Ramakr-
ishnan. Can an llm induce a graph? investigating memory drift and context length. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.03611, 2025.
[46] Pengfei Yu and Heng Ji. Self information update for large language models through mitigating
exposure bias. ArXiv preprint, abs/2305.18582, 2023.
[47] Ruihong Zeng, Jinyuan Fang, Siwei Liu, and Zaiqiao Meng. On the structural memory of llm
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15266, 2024.
[48] Hao Zhang, Dongjun Yu, Lei Zhang, Guoping Rong, Yongda Yu, Haifeng Shen, He Zhang,
Dong Shao, and Hongyu Kuang. Logfilm: Fine-tuning a large language model for automated
generation of log statements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18835, 2024.
[49] Yusen Zhang, Ansong Ni, Ziming Mao, Chen Henry Wu, Chenguang Zhu, Budhaditya Deb,
Ahmed Awadallah, Dragomir Radev, and Rui Zhang. Summn: A multi-stage summarization

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
framework for long input dialogues and documents. In Proceedings of the 60th annual meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (volume 1: long papers), pages 1592-1604,
2022.
[50] Zihan Zhou, Chong Li, Xinyi Chen, Shuo Wang, Yu Chao, Zhili Li, Haoyu Wang, Qi Shi,
Zhixing Tan, Xu Han, et al. Llm× mapreduce: Simplified long-sequence processing using
large language models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 27664-27678, 2025.
School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield,
United Kingdom
Email address: Siraaj.Akhtar@hud.ac.uk, saad.khan@hud.ac.uk, S.Parkinson@hud.ac.uk
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
YesSomewhat No
20
60
100
%
(a) Q2
YesSomewhat No
20
60
100
%
(b) Q3
Question 1
Question 2
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
(c) Q5 and Q6
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
(d) Q15
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
(e) Q16
BTLM-3b
Bloom4b
Gemma4b
Mistral7b
Bloom7b
Gemma7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
(f) Q10
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
2
Average Hallucination Rating
(g) Q13
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
(h) Q14
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
2
Average Score
(i) Q9
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
(j) Q12
Figure 3. Compilation of all charts relating to questions and their
answers from the expert evaluation.

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
Yes
Somewhat
No
20
60
100
%
Figure 4. Distribution of responses for the validity of the fine-
tuning instruction.
Yes
Somewhat
No
20
60
100
%
Figure 5. Distribution of responses to whether the dataset con-
tained a comprehensive set of logs.
Question 1
Question 2
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
Figure 6. Response distribution for two evaluation questions.
Q5: Are the solutions to problems identified, correct?
Q6: Do
they contain enough information for someone to resolve the issue?
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
Figure 7. Distribution of responses regarding whether the model
was able to handle large groups of event logs.
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
Figure 8. Distribution of responses for whether the responses
took into account all of the logs in the log groups.

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
BTLM-3b
Bloom4b
Gemma4b
Mistral7b
Bloom7b
Gemma7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
Figure 9. Distribution of responses to whether the outputs made
sense.
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
2
Average Hallucination Rating
Figure 10. Average hallucination rating per model (lower indi-
cates fewer hallucinations).
SIRAAJ AKHTAR, SAAD KHAN, AND SIMON PARKINSON
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
Figure 11. Distribution of responses regarding understandability
despite the presence of hallucinations.
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
2
Average Score
Figure 12. Distribution of responses regarding the models’ abil-
ity to correctly identify issues.

FINE-TUNING SMALL LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SOLUTION-ORIENTED WINDOWS EVENT LOG ANALYSIS
BTLM-3b
Gemma4b
Bloom4b
Mistral7b
Gemma7b
Bloom7b
20
60
100
%
Yes
Somewhat
No
Figure 13. Distribution of responses regarding whether the in-
formation provided was enough to resolve issues.
A: Training Data
Training dataset is used to fine-tune the model.
B: Fine-tuned Model
C: Test Input (System Logs)
2020-11-14 08:25:14 | Machine=LAPTOP-1MKMTVPM | ID=2 |
svchost (13360,R,98) TILEREPOSITORYS-1-5-18: Error -1023
(0xfffffc01) occurred while opening logfile
C:\WINDOWS\system32\config\· · · \TileDataLayer\Database\EDB.log
2020-11-14 08:25:51 | Machine=LAPTOP-1MKMTVPM | ID=62 |
The VSS service is shutting down due to idle timeout.
D: Model Output
Problem Identified:
svchost error writing to a database log file; VSS service shutdown due to idle timeout.
How to Resolve:
Investigate the svchost error, verify disk space, restart the VSS service, and consider increasing the
VSS idle timeout.
Figure 14. Diagram illustrating the fine-tuned Gemma-4B log
analysis pipeline