Litespark Inference on Consumer CPUs:
Custom SIMD Kernels for Ternary Neural Networks
Nii Osae Osae Dade
Tony Morri
Moinul Hossain Rahat
Sayandip Pal
Mindbeam AI ∗
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have transformed artificial intelligence, but their
computational requirements remain prohibitive for most users. Standard infer-
ence demands expensive datacenter GPUs or cloud API access, leaving over one
billion personal computers underutilized for AI workloads. Ternary models of-
fer a path forward: their weights are constrained to {−1, 0, +1}, theoretically
eliminating the need for floating-point multiplication. However, existing frame-
works fail to exploit this structure, treating ternary models as dense floating-point
networks. We address this gap with custom SIMD kernels that replace matrix
multiplication with simple addition and subtraction operations, targeting the in-
teger dot product instructions available on modern CPUs. Our implementation,
Litespark-Inference, is pip-installable and integrates directly with Hugging-
Face, achieving 9.2× faster time-to-first-token, 52× higher throughput, and 14×
memory reduction compared to standard PyTorch inference on Apple Silicon, with
similar speedups on Intel and AMD processors.
Introduction
Large language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of tasks,
from natural language understanding to code generation. However, deploying these models remains
challenging due to their substantial computational and memory requirements. GPU-based inference
requires datacenter GPUs costing $25,000-$40,000 per unit [1], or cloud API access at $2.50-$10
per million tokens [2]. Meanwhile, there are over one billion personal computers in use worldwide
[3]. These devices have capable CPUs that remain underutilized for AI workloads, and could run
LLMs if the software existed to exploit them.
Beyond cost, on-device inference offers compelling advantages for privacy and accessibility. Run-
ning models locally keeps sensitive data on the user’s machine, avoiding transmission to external
servers. It enables offline operation without network connectivity, reduces latency by eliminating
round-trip communication, and democratizes access to AI capabilities for users in regions with lim-
ited cloud infrastructure or unreliable internet.
Recent advances in model quantization have reduced the resource requirements for LLM inference.
Approaches like 4-bit and 8-bit quantization [20] have made it possible to run smaller models on
consumer hardware. Ternary models, e.g., BitNet [5], TriLM [6], take quantization to its theoretical
limit: ternary weights that can only take values from {−1, 0, +1}. This extreme quantization has
a profound implication: matrix multiplication, the dominant operation in neural networks, becomes
unnecessary. When weights are ternary, computing y = P
j xj · wj reduces to simple conditional
operations, adding xj to the accumulator when wj = +1, subtracting xj when wj = −1, and
skipping the operation entirely when wj = 0.
∗Correspondence to: research@mindbeam.ai
Mindbeam AI 2026
arXiv:2605.06485v1 [cs.CL] 7 May 2026

While the theoretical advantages of ternary models are clear, their practical CPU-based inference has
only recently become feasible. Three developments make efficient CPU inference for these models
timely.
First, the required hardware capabilities have only recently become widespread. The SIMD instruc-
tions required for efficient integer dot products arrived when Intel introduced AVX-512 VNNI with
Ice Lake (2019), ARM Holdings developed and deployed SDOT as part of their NEON Advanced
SIMD architecture, first appearing in Apple’s M1 chip (2020) and now ubiquitous across billions
of ARM-based mobile devices, and AMD brought AVX-512 to consumer chips with Zen4 (2022).
ARM’s foresight in incorporating efficient integer dot product capabilities into their architecture has
proven particularly impactful, as ARM-based processors now power not only Apple’s entire Mac
lineup but also the vast majority of smartphones and tablets worldwide. Before these instructions,
CPU-based neural network inference was bottlenecked by the lack of efficient integer arithmetic.
Second, production-quality ternary LLMs have become available. While ternary quantization has
been studied theoretically, Microsoft’s release of BitNet b1.58 in 2024 provided a 2-billion parame-
ter model trained on 4 trillion tokens that demonstrates competitive performance with full-precision
models of similar size.
Third, the demand-supply gap has widened. LLM usage is growing rapidly, but GPU availability
remains constrained and costs remain high. Most developers and researchers cannot justify dedicated
GPU hardware for experimentation. Efficient CPU inference offers an accessible alternative that
runs on hardware already owned.
Given these converging developments in hardware, models, and demand, we address the gap be-
tween the theoretical potential of ternary models and its practical realization. Despite the theoretical
advantage of ternary weights, existing inference frameworks do not fully exploit their structure.
Standard PyTorch [4] treats these models as dense floating-point networks, missing the opportu-
nity for optimization. Specialized frameworks like llama.cpp focus on 4-bit quantization rather than
ternary operations.
We present custom SIMD kernels that eliminate multiplication for ternary inference. Our imple-
mentation targets three major CPU architectures. On Apple Silicon (M1-M4), we use NEON SDOT
instructions with 128-bit vectors. On Intel Ice Lake and AMD Zen4 (and later), we use AVX-512
VNNI instructions with 512-bit vectors. On Intel Core Ultra, we use AVX-VNNI instructions with
256-bit vectors.
This work makes three contributions. First, we develop custom SIMD kernels that exploit ternary
weight structure for multiplication-free inference, replacing floating-point matrix multiplication with
integer addition and subtraction via hardware dot product instructions. Second, we package these
kernels as a pip-installable Python library called Litespark-Inference, with automatic platform
detection and HuggingFace Transformers [24] integration. Third, we provide comprehensive bench-
marks for the specific case of BitNet b1.58 model, demonstrating 21-52× throughput improvement
and ∼14× memory reduction across platforms.
Background
2.1
Neural Network Quantization
Neural networks store their learned knowledge in weights, numerical parameters that transform input
data into predictions. In standard networks, weights are stored as 32-bit floating-point numbers
(float32), allowing fine-grained values like 0.00142 or -3.7891. However, this precision comes at a
cost: a 2-billion parameter model requires 8 GB of memory just for weights.
Quantization reduces memory by storing weights with fewer bits. Common approaches range from
16-bit formats like bfloat16 and float16, which halve memory with minimal accuracy loss, down
through 8-bit integer representation (one quarter the memory with small accuracy loss) and 4-bit
quantization (one-eighth the memory with moderate accuracy loss). At the extreme end lies ternary
quantization at 1.58 bits, where weights are restricted to only three possible values: {−1, 0, +1}.
The idea of extreme weight quantization has a rich history. BinaryConnect [8] first demonstrated
that neural networks could be trained with a set of binary weights {−1, +1} during forward and
backward propagation, achieving competitive results on MNIST and CIFAR-10. This work estab-
lished that the computational benefits of binary weights, replacing multiplications with simple sign
changes, could be realized without catastrophic accuracy loss, laying the groundwork for modern
ternary approaches.
Recent work has developed increasingly sophisticated quantization techniques for large language
models. LLM.int8() [9] introduced mixed-precision decomposition to handle outlier features in
billion-scale transformers, enabling 8-bit inference without performance degradation. GPTQ [10]
introduced accurate post-training quantization using approximate second-order information, en-
abling 3-4 bit quantization with minimal accuracy loss. AWQ [11] demonstrated that protecting
only 1% of salient weights significantly reduces quantization error. SmoothQuant [12] enables
W8A8 quantization by migrating quantization difficulty from activations to weights. QLoRA [13],
building on LoRA’s [14] low-rank adaptation approach, extended these techniques to enable effi-
cient fine-tuning of 4-bit quantized models on consumer hardware. For a comprehensive overview
of quantization methods, we refer the readers to recent surveys [15].
Ternary quantization is the most extreme form. Each weight can only say "add," "subtract," or
"skip", nothing in between. This seems limiting, but models like BitNet and TriLM trained natively
with this constraint demonstrate that ternary quantized models can match the performance of full-
precision models.
2.2
Ternary Model Architecture
Ternary models follow the standard transformer architecture [16] but constrain all linear layer
weights to ternary values. For our benchmarks, we use BitNet b1.58 [7], a 2-billion parameter
model trained on 4 trillion tokens that demonstrates competitive performance with full-precision
counterparts.
2.2.1
The Computational Advantage
In a standard linear layer, the forward pass computes:
Y = XW
(1)
where X ∈RM×K is the input activation matrix (M tokens, K features) and W ∈RK×N is the
weight matrix. Each output element requires K multiply-accumulate operations:
Yij =
K
X
k=1
Xik · Wkj
(2)
For a typical layer with K = 2048 and N = 8192, this means 16 million multiplications per token,
and a 2B parameter model has dozens of such layers.
With ternary weights W ∈{−1, 0, +1}K×N, multiplication becomes trivial:
Yij =
X
k:Wkj=+1
Xik −
X
k:Wkj=−1
Xik
(3)
The computation reduces to addition and subtraction. Weights equal to zero contribute nothing and
can be skipped entirely.
2.2.2
Memory Savings
The memory advantage of ternary weights is straightforward to quantify. Since each weight takes
one of three values, two bits per parameter suffice to encode the full weight space. This stands in
stark contrast to the 32 bits required for standard float32 representation.
For a 2B parameter ternary model, this difference translates to substantial memory savings. A float32
representation would require 2×109×32 bits, or approximately 8 GB of memory for weights alone.
A pure 2-bit ternary encoding would theoretically need only 2 × 109 × 2 bits, approximately 500
MB.
In practice, our implementation uses 8 bits per weight rather than the theoretical minimum of 2
bits. This decision prioritizes compatibility with hardware dot product instructions, which expect
8-bit integer inputs. The practical storage footprint is approximately 556 MB after accounting for
alignment padding, still achieving a 14× reduction compared to float32. We discuss the rationale
for this design choice in detail in Section 3.
2.3
SIMD Instructions on Modern CPUs
While ternary weights reduce the computational complexity of neural network operations, realizing
these benefits in practice requires specialized hardware support. Modern CPUs provide such support
through SIMD instructions.
Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) is a CPU feature that processes multiple values simultane-
ously with a single instruction. Rather than adding two numbers one at a time, a SIMD instruction
can add 16 or 64 pairs of numbers in one cycle.
Modern CPUs have wide vector registers that hold multiple data elements. A 128-bit register can
hold 16 int8 values (or 4 int32 values), a 256-bit register holds 32 int8 values, and a 512-bit register
holds 64 int8 values.
2.3.1
Dot Product Instructions
The critical enabler for efficient ternary inference is a family of specialized SIMD instructions de-
signed for neural network workloads. These instructions compute integer dot products with native
hardware support, eliminating the need for explicit loops over vector elements.
ARM’s NEON instruction set, available on Apple Silicon (M1 through M4) and mobile ARM pro-
cessors, provides the SDOT instruction. ARM Holdings developed the NEON Advanced SIMD
architecture as a key component of their energy-efficient processor designs. The SDOT (signed
dot product) instruction, part of ARM’s ARMv8.2-A DotProd extension, computes the dot product
of 16 int8 values, accumulating into four int32 results. Each instruction performs 16 multiply-add
operations with exceptional power efficiency. This instruction set is now deployed across billions
of devices worldwide, from Apple’s Mac lineup to Android smartphones and embedded systems.
ARM’s comprehensive documentation [17] provides detailed specifications for developers leverag-
ing these capabilities. The widespread adoption of ARM’s NEON architecture has made efficient
on-device AI inference accessible to a global user base.
On x86 architectures, Intel and AMD provide the AVX-512 VNNI instruction set (Intel Ice Lake
and later, AMD Zen4 and later). The VPDPBUSD instruction computes dot products across 64 int8
values per instruction, 4× the throughput of NEON. Intel provides detailed documentation as part
of Intel Deep Learning Boost [18].
For Intel processors without full AVX-512 support, the AVX-VNNI instruction set (available start-
ing with 12th generation Core processors and Core Ultra) offers a middle ground. These 256-bit
instructions process 32 int8 values per operation, providing better throughput than NEON while
maintaining compatibility with processors that lack full AVX-512 capability.
On Apple Silicon, the undocumented AMX (Apple Matrix Extensions) coprocessor [19] provides
additional matrix acceleration capabilities, which we leverage through the Accelerate framework for
our float32 accuracy mode.
Table 1 summarizes the SIMD capabilities across platforms.
Platform
Vector Width
int8 ops/instruction
Instruction
Apple M1-M4
128-bit
SDOT
Intel Core Ultra
256-bit
VPDPBUSD
Intel Ice Lake+
512-bit
VPDPBUSD
AMD Zen4+
512-bit
VPDPBUSD
Table 1: SIMD capabilities for integer dot products across CPU platforms.
3
Related Work
With an understanding of the hardware capabilities available, we now examine how existing frame-
works approach CPU inference for LLMs and where our work fits within this landscape. Several
strategies for efficient CPU-based inference have been explored, each with distinct architectural
choices and performance tradeoffs. Table 2 provides a comparative overview of the major frame-
works.
Framework
Precision
Ternary-Optimized
pip install
HuggingFace
llama.cpp [20]
4/8-bit
No
No
No
T-MAC [21]
Ternary
Yes (LUT)
No
No
BitNet.cpp [22]
Ternary
Yes
No
No
Litespark-Inference
Ternary
Yes (SIMD)
Yes
Yes
Table 2: Comparison of CPU inference frameworks.
The llama.cpp and GGML frameworks [20] have established themselves as widely-used tools for
CPU inference of quantized language models. These frameworks primarily target 4-bit and 8-bit
quantization schemes, applying general-purpose quantization techniques that do not exploit the spe-
cific algebraic properties of ternary weights. While effective for their target precision levels, these
approaches cannot leverage the multiplication-free computation enabled by ternary quantization.
T-MAC [21] takes a fundamentally different approach to ternary inference through lookup-table-
based (LUT) computation. Rather than computing dot products directly, T-MAC precomputes re-
sults for all possible input combinations and retrieves them during inference via table lookups. This
method can achieve strong performance by trading computation for memory bandwidth. However,
the approach requires substantial memory to store the lookup tables and introduces implementation
complexity in managing table organization and access patterns.
Microsoft’s BitNet.cpp [22] provides an official reference implementation for ternary inference with
specialized optimizations. While this framework demonstrates effective ternary inference, it requires
specific build configurations, compiler flags, and manual setup. The lack of integration with standard
Python package managers and the HuggingFace ecosystem creates friction for practitioners seeking
to experiment with ternary models.
FlashAttention [23] addresses a different bottleneck, the quadratic memory complexity of attention,
through IO-aware algorithms that reduce memory reads/writes between GPU HBM and SRAM.
While orthogonal to our work on linear layer optimization, FlashAttention demonstrates the impor-
tance of hardware-aware algorithm design for efficient inference.
Litespark-Inference differs by using direct SIMD dot product instructions rather than lookup tables,
resulting in simpler code that is easier to understand and maintain. The implementation is packaged
as a standard pip-installable library with automatic HuggingFace model loading.
Method
Having established the theoretical foundations and limitations of existing approaches, we now de-
scribe our implementation. The key challenge is bridging the gap between the theoretical simplicity
of ternary operations (just add and subtract) and the practical requirements of hardware execution,
which must account for memory alignment constraints, numerical precision through quantization,
and computational stability.
4.1
Kernel Design
Our kernel design philosophy centers on three core principles. First, we exploit the ternary weight
structure to eliminate multiplication operations entirely, replacing them with conditional addition
and subtraction. Second, we leverage hardware SIMD dot product instructions to achieve data-level
parallelism, processing multiple elements simultaneously. Third, we maintain numerical accuracy
through careful quantization of activations and systematic correction of quantization-induced biases.
The following subsections detail how each principle is realized in our implementation.
4.1.1
Weight Representation
A natural question is how to store ternary weights. Since each weight can take one of the three
possible values from the set {−1, 0, +1}, two bits per weight would suffice. However, we store
weights as 8-bit signed integers instead.
This choice is driven by hardware constraints. The SIMD dot product instructions we rely on (SDOT,
VPDPBUSD) expect 8-bit integer inputs. Using 2-bit packing would require unpacking weights
before every computation, negating the performance benefit. By storing weights as int8, we can
feed them directly to hardware instructions with no preprocessing.
The memory cost of this choice is modest. For a 2B parameter ternary model, 2-bit packing would
require approximately 500 MB, while our 8-bit storage requires approximately 556 MB after align-
ment padding. The 56 MB difference is small compared to the 14× reduction from float32 (8 GB),
and the performance gain from direct hardware utilization far outweighs this cost.
4.1.2
Activation Quantization
While weights are ternary, input activations (the values flowing through the network) are continuous
floating-point numbers. To use integer dot product instructions, we must quantize these activations
to int8.
We employ per-row symmetric quantization. For each row of the activation matrix (corresponding
to one token), we find the maximum absolute value and scale all values to fit within the int8 range
[−127, +127]:
xint8 = round
 x · 127
max(|x|)

,
scale = max(|x|)
(4)
The scale factor is saved so we can convert results back to float32 after computation. This approach
preserves relative magnitudes within each token’s activations, if one value was twice another before
quantization, it remains approximately twice as large after.
4.1.3
The Computation Pipeline
The complete forward pass through a linear layer proceeds through four stages. First, activations
are quantized by converting float32 inputs to int8 while saving the scale factor. Next, the kernel
computes dot products using SIMD instructions to calculate P
k xk · wk for each output. The re-
sults then undergo zero-point correction, subtracting the bias introduced by quantization (explained
below). Finally, the int32 results are rescaled back to float32 by multiplying with the saved scale
factor.
4.1.4
SIMD Dot Product
The core computation uses hardware dot product instructions that process multiple int8 pairs si-
multaneously. On ARM-based processors, ARM’s NEON vsdotq_s32 instruction computes the
dot product of 16 int8 value pairs, accumulating into 4 int32 results. ARM’s design philosophy
emphasizes power efficiency alongside performance, making these instructions particularly well-
suited for mobile and edge deployment scenarios. On Intel and AMD processors with AVX-512, the
_mm512_dpbusd_epi32 instruction processes 64 int8 pairs per instruction, while the AVX-VNNI
variant _mm256_dpbusd_epi32 handles 32 int8 pairs per instruction on Intel Core Ultra processors.
These instructions are designed for neural network inference and achieve high throughput on modern
processors, with multiple operations completing per cycle when pipelined. The int32 accumulator
prevents overflow even when summing thousands of int8 products.
4.1.5
Zero-Point Correction
Symmetric int8 quantization maps floating-point zero to integer zero. However, the quantization
formula can introduce a small bias when values are not perfectly centered. This bias, called the
zero-point, must be corrected to maintain accuracy.
The correction is straightforward. We precompute the sum of each weight column:
col_sumj =
X
i
Wij
(5)
After the dot product, we subtract zero_point × col_sumj from each output j. Since column sums
are constant for a given model, they are computed once during model loading and reused for every
inference.
4.2
Platform-Specific Implementations
The diversity of SIMD instruction sets across modern CPU architectures necessitates platform-
specific kernel implementations. While the algorithmic approach remains consistent across plat-
forms, each target requires its own low-level implementation tailored to the available instruction set
and register organization. Table 3 summarizes the configurations.
Platform
Instruction
Vector Width
Alignment
Apple Silicon (M1-M4)
NEON SDOT
128-bit
16 bytes
Intel Ice Lake+
AVX-512 VNNI
512-bit
64 bytes
AMD Zen4+
AVX-512 VNNI
512-bit
64 bytes
Intel Core Ultra
AVX-VNNI
256-bit
32 bytes
Table 3: Platform-specific kernel configurations. Alignment refers to the memory boundary weights
must be padded to for optimal SIMD access.
Memory alignment is critical for SIMD performance. Vector load instructions work most efficiently
when data starts at addresses divisible by the vector width (i.e., addresses that are multiples of 16, 32,
or 64 bytes depending on the platform). Misaligned loads may require multiple memory transactions
or trigger slower unaligned load paths in the hardware.
To ensure optimal performance, we pad weight matrices to the appropriate boundary during model
loading such that each row begins at an address satisfying the platform’s alignment requirement.
This padding introduces negligible memory overhead but ensures every load operation runs at full
speed.
Our implementation incorporates automatic platform detection to select the appropriate kernel at
runtime. During library initialization, the system queries the CPU’s feature flags (using CPUID on
x86 or equivalent mechanisms on ARM) to determine which SIMD instruction sets are available.
Based on this information, the library dispatches to the corresponding platform-specific kernel. This
design eliminates the need for users to manually specify their hardware configuration, simplifying
deployment across heterogeneous environments.
4.3
Accuracy Modes
Beyond performance optimization, another practical consideration for deployment is the tradeoff
between computational efficiency and numerical precision. Integer quantization introduces small
numerical differences compared to full float32 computation. For most applications, these differences
are imperceptible, the model generates the same text. However, some applications require exact
numerical reproducibility.
To accommodate this spectrum of requirements, our implementation on Apple Silicon provides two
distinct inference modes.
The NEON mode uses int8 quantized activations for maximum speed. When limiting precision
to int8, numerical deviations can occur. We quantify this using the "maximum logit difference,"
defined as the largest deviation from the reference output across all logits. Our measurements show
this difference is approximately 0.68 compared to float32 reference computation. In practice, this
small deviation has no observable effect on generation quality: the same tokens are sampled, and
the output text remains indistinguishable.
The Accelerate mode provides an alternative for users requiring exact reproducibility. It leverages
Apple’s Accelerate framework with AMX (Apple Matrix Extensions) for float32 computation. This
provides bit-exact accuracy matching PyTorch reference output, at the cost of higher memory usage
and lower throughput compared to NEON mode.
For Intel and AMD platforms, we currently provide only the int8 quantized mode, which offers the
best performance while maintaining generation quality indistinguishable from the reference.
Implementation
The previous section described the algorithmic techniques underlying our kernels. This section
turns to engineering concerns: how we package these kernels into a usable system that developers
can adopt without specialized knowledge.
A key goal of this work is accessibility. Many efficient inference implementations require com-
plex build processes, specific compiler versions, or manual hardware configuration. We designed
our implementation to be installable with a single command and usable without any knowledge of
the underlying SIMD optimizations. Our implementation is available at 
Mindbeam-AI/Litespark-Inference.
5.1
System Architecture
The implementation has four main components:
C++ SIMD kernels. The performance-critical dot product operations are implemented in C++ us-
ing platform-specific intrinsics (NEON for ARM-based processors, AVX-512/AVX-VNNI for x86).
These kernels are compiled as PyTorch C++ extensions, allowing them to be called directly from
Python with minimal overhead. Each platform has its own kernel file, and the build system automat-
ically compiles only the relevant one.
Python interface.
The user-facing API is pure Python, handling model loading, tokeniza-
tion, and generation. Users interact with familiar PyTorch-style methods (model.generate(),
model.forward()) without needing to know that custom kernels are running underneath.
Automatic platform detection. The runtime dispatching mechanism described in Section 4 is im-
plemented by querying CPU feature flags at import time. The library then loads the appropriate
pre-compiled kernel, making the optimization transparent to users.
KV cache. Language models generate text one token at a time. Without caching, each new token
would require recomputing attention over the entire sequence, an O(n2) cost that grows quadrati-
cally with sequence length. The KV (key-value) cache stores intermediate attention results, reducing
each generation step to O(n). Our implementation uses a pre-allocated cache to avoid memory al-
location during generation.
5.2
Weight Conversion
Ternary models distributed via HuggingFace store weights in standard floating-point format to en-
sure compatibility with existing frameworks. Our implementation performs an offline conversion to
the optimized int8 ternary format described in Section 3.
The conversion process proceeds through several stages. The system first downloads the model from
HuggingFace, with subsequent downloads served from a local cache. Each weight is then rounded
to the nearest ternary value (−1, 0, or +1) and converted to int8 representation. The weight matrices
are padded to satisfy SIMD alignment requirements for the target platform. During this process, we
also precompute the column sums required for zero-point correction (Section 3.1.5). The converted
model is serialized to disk, enabling fast loading on subsequent runs.
This conversion overhead is incurred only on the first load of a model. All subsequent loads directly
deserialize the converted representation, eliminating the conversion latency.
5.3
User Interface
The package provides both Python and command-line interfaces. The Python API integrates with
HuggingFace, automatically downloading and converting ternary models:
from
litespark_inference
import
load_model
model , tokenizer = load_model("bitnet -2b")
input_ids = tokenizer.encode("Hello ,␣world!", return_tensors ="pt")
output = model.generate(input_ids , max_new_tokens =100)
print(tokenizer.decode(output [0]))
For users who prefer the command line, we provide a CLI with three modes:
litespark -inference
generate "The␣meaning␣of␣life␣is"
litespark -inference
chat
litespark -inference
benchmark
The generate command produces a single completion. The chat command starts an interactive
session with conversation history. The benchmark command measures throughput and memory
usage on the current hardware.
5.4
Installation
Installation requires only pip:
pip
install
litespark -inference
5.5
Reproducibility
All code, benchmarking scripts, and instructions for reproducing our results are available in the
repository Litespark-Inference. The benchmark command included in the package measures
throughput and memory usage on the user’s hardware, enabling direct comparison with our reported
results. Model weights are automatically downloaded from HuggingFace on first use.
Experimental Results
6.1
Setup
We evaluate our implementation using the Microsoft BitNet b1.58 2B-4T model, a 2-billion param-
eter ternary model trained on 4 trillion tokens. This is currently the only publicly available ternary
model of significant scale.
We tested on three hardware platforms representing the major CPU architectures in consumer de-
vices today: Apple M4 (MacBook Pro with 10-core CPU), Intel Ice Lake and AMD Zen4 processors
with AVX-512 VNNI support, and Intel Core Ultra with AVX-VNNI.
We establish PyTorch with native backend (Accelerate on macOS, MKL on Linux) as our baseline.
This configuration represents the standard approach of running ternary models through conventional
dense matrix operations, treating ternary weights as regular floating-point values.
We report three metrics. First, memory consumption is measured as peak RSS (Resident Set Size)
during inference, capturing the actual physical memory footprint of the process. Second, TTFT
(time to first token) measures the latency from prompt submission to first token generation, char-
acterizing system responsiveness. Third, throughput is measured as tokens generated per second
during autoregressive generation with KV caching enabled, characterizing the sustained generation
rate for complete responses.
6.2
Apple Silicon Results
Figure 1 and Table 4 show the performance comparison on Apple M4. We compare three config-
urations: standard PyTorch (baseline), Litespark-Inference with NEON (int8 quantized), and the
Accelerate mode (float32 with Apple’s AMX).
Figure 1: Performance comparison on Apple Silicon M4. Litespark-Inference achieves ∼14× mem-
ory reduction, 9.2× faster TTFT, and 52× higher throughput compared to PyTorch.
Metric
PyTorch
NEON
Accelerate
Memory (MB)
7,673
6,949
TTFT (ms)
2,632
373
Throughput (tok/s)
0.39
20.4
5.52
Table 4: Detailed results on Apple Silicon M4. Memory is peak RSS, TTFT is time to first token,
throughput is tokens per second during generation.
Litespark-Inference achieves substantial improvements across all metrics. Memory usage drops
by approximately 14×, from 7,673 MB to just 556 MB. This allows the model to fit comfortably in
RAM on devices with 8 GB of memory. Time to first token improves by 9.2×, from 2,632 ms to 288
ms. The model now responds in under 300 milliseconds rather than over 2.5 seconds. Throughput
increases by 52×, from 0.39 tokens per second to 20.4 tokens per second. At 20 tokens per second,
text appears instantly; at 0.39 tokens per second, users would wait over two seconds per token.
The Accelerate mode provides a middle ground with exact accuracy, achieving 7.1× faster TTFT
and 14.2× higher throughput than PyTorch. This mode is useful when numerical reproducibility is
required.
6.3
Intel and AMD Results
We evaluate on two x86 configurations: processors with full AVX-512 VNNI support (512-bit vec-
tors), and Intel Core Ultra with AVX-VNNI (256-bit vectors).
Figure 2: Performance comparison on Intel Ice Lake / AMD Zen4 using AVX-512 VNNI kernels.
Metric
PyTorch
AVX-512 VNNI
Speedup
Memory (MB)
7,800
14.0×
TTFT (ms)
2,450
12.6×
Throughput (tok/s)
0.42
11.2
26.7×
Table 5: Results on Intel Ice Lake / AMD Zen4 (AVX-512 VNNI). The wider 512-bit vectors enable
higher throughput than other platforms.
The AVX-512 VNNI kernel achieves 11.2 tokens per second with a 26.7× speedup. The 512-bit
vector width allows processing 64 int8 values per instruction, compared to 16 for NEON.
Figure 3: Performance comparison on Intel Core Ultra using AVX-VNNI kernels.
Metric
PyTorch
AVX-VNNI
Speedup
Memory (MB)
7,750
13.9×
TTFT (ms)
2,580
8.3×
Throughput (tok/s)
0.40
8.5
21.3×
Table 6: Results on Intel Core Ultra (AVX-VNNI). Performance falls between NEON and AVX-512,
consistent with the 256-bit vector width.
The AVX-VNNI results demonstrate that even the 256-bit variant provides substantial speedups over
baseline PyTorch. The 8.5 tokens per second throughput is sufficient for interactive use.
6.4
Cross-Platform Comparison
Figure 4 compares speedups across all tested platforms, normalizing each metric against the PyTorch
baseline.
Figure 4: Cross-platform performance comparison showing consistent speedups across Apple Sili-
con, Intel, and AMD processors.
Several key observations emerge from the cross-platform comparison. All platforms achieve greater
than 8× TTFT speedup and greater than 21× throughput improvement over the PyTorch baseline.
Memory reduction remains consistent at approximately 14× across platforms, as this is determined
by the weight representation rather than the kernel implementation. Apple Silicon’s NEON achieves
the highest throughput speedup (52×), likely due to its unified memory architecture and efficient
cache hierarchy, demonstrating that memory bandwidth rather than SIMD width is the primary bot-
tleneck for ternary inference.
Discussion
The experimental results demonstrate substantial performance improvements across all tested plat-
forms. We now analyze the sources of these gains, discuss practical considerations for deployment,
and identify directions for future work.
7.1
Why Such Large Speedups?
The 9-23× throughput improvements we observe are not the result of a single optimization, but
rather the compounding effect of multiple factors working together.
First, ternary weights eliminate floating-point multiplication entirely. Standard matrix multiplication
requires expensive floating-point multiply-accumulate operations. With ternary weights, multiplica-
tion becomes trivial: multiplying by +1 is a no-op, multiplying by −1 is negation, and multiplying
by 0 is skipping. This fundamentally changes the computational bottleneck from arithmetic to mem-
ory bandwidth.
Second, int8 representation enables direct use of hardware dot product instructions. Modern CPUs
include specialized SIMD instructions (SDOT, VPDPBUSD) designed specifically for neural net-
work inference. These instructions process 16-64 int8 pairs per cycle with high throughput. By
storing weights as int8, we can feed data directly to these instructions without unpacking or conver-
sion.
Third, the 14× memory reduction improves cache utilization. A 2B parameter model requires 8 GB
in float32 but only 556 MB in our int8 ternary format. This allows the entire model to fit in CPU
cache hierarchies more effectively, reducing memory bandwidth pressure. When weights fit in L3
cache, access latency drops from hundreds of cycles (DRAM) to tens of cycles (cache).
Fourth, the KV cache optimization reduces redundant computation during autoregressive generation.
Without caching, each new token would require recomputing attention over the entire sequence. The
cache converts this O(n2) cost into O(n), providing speedups that grow with sequence length.
The baseline PyTorch implementation suffers from treating ternary weights as dense float32 ma-
trices. It performs full floating-point matrix multiplication, uses 14× more memory, and cannot
leverage specialized integer dot product instructions. Our implementation exploits the ternary struc-
ture at every level of the system.
7.2
Accuracy Considerations
A natural concern with int8 quantization is whether it degrades generation quality. We address this
through careful measurement and comparison.
We quantify numerical deviation using the maximum logit difference: the largest absolute difference
between Litespark-Inference’s int8 output and the float32 reference across all logits. For the NEON
kernel on Apple Silicon, this difference is approximately 0.68, the largest deviation in any logit value
is less than 1.0.
In practice, this small numerical difference has no observable effect on generation quality. Language
model generation uses sampling or greedy decoding based on logit rankings. A deviation of 0.68 is
insufficient to change which token has the highest probability in almost all cases. We verified this
by generating hundreds of samples with both the int8 and float32 implementations: the outputs are
identical.
For applications requiring bit-exact reproducibility (e.g., regression testing, deterministic debug-
ging), we provide the Accelerate mode on Apple Silicon, which uses float32 computation and
matches PyTorch output exactly.
7.3
Limitations
Our implementation targets ternary models specifically. The techniques do not directly apply to
models using 4-bit or 8-bit quantization, which require different kernel designs. However, the gen-
eral principle, exploiting quantization structure with hardware SIMD instructions, applies broadly.
The current implementation has been validated on the BitNet architecture. Adapting to other ternary
architectures would require modifying the model loading and layer replacement logic, though the
core kernels would remain unchanged.
Performance is limited by memory bandwidth rather than compute throughput. On all tested plat-
forms, the kernels are memory-bound: they spend more time loading weights from memory than
computing dot products. Future work could explore weight compression or caching strategies to
further reduce bandwidth pressure.
7.4
Future Work
Several directions could extend this work:
Mobile deployment. ARM Holdings’ NEON architecture, with its SDOT instruction, is deployed
across billions of mobile devices worldwide, from Apple’s iPhone and iPad lineup to Android smart-
phones and tablets powered by Qualcomm, Samsung, and MediaTek processors. The kernels de-
veloped for Apple Silicon use the same ARM instruction set available on these mobile platforms.
Adapting the implementation for iOS and Android would enable on-device LLM inference without
network connectivity, leveraging ARM’s global ecosystem. This would be particularly impactful
given ARM’s dominant position in mobile computing, where power efficiency and on-device pro-
cessing are critical. ARM’s consistent architecture across their product lines, from high-performance
processors in Apple’s M-series chips to energy-efficient cores in mobile SoCs, means that optimiza-
tions developed for one ARM platform can benefit the entire ARM ecosystem.
Larger models. Ternary training has been demonstrated at 2B parameters. As larger ternary models
become available (10B, 70B+), our kernels would scale naturally, with memory savings becoming
even more critical.
Training support. Current work focuses on inference. Extending the kernels to support backward
passes would enable efficient fine-tuning of ternary models on consumer hardware.
Hybrid quantization. Some models use ternary weights with higher-precision activations (e.g.,
int16 or bfloat16). Adapting the kernels to support mixed-precision computation could improve
accuracy while maintaining most of the performance benefits.
7.5
Extending to Non-Ternary Models
While our kernels target ternary weights, the underlying techniques generalize to other quantization
schemes. The key insight is matching the quantization format to available hardware instructions.
For 4-bit quantization, one could pack two 4-bit weights into each int8 value and use similar SIMD
dot product instructions. For 2-bit quantization, four weights could be packed per byte. The chal-
lenge is balancing the cost of unpacking against the benefit of reduced memory bandwidth.
For asymmetric quantization (where zero-point is non-zero), the zero-point correction logic would
need adjustment, but the core SIMD computation remains the same.
The broader lesson is that hardware-aware quantization, choosing quantization formats that align
with available instructions, can unlock substantial performance improvements on consumer CPUs.
Conclusion
This work demonstrates that ternary neural networks can achieve practical, high-performance in-
ference on consumer CPUs through hardware-aware kernel design. By exploiting the structure of
ternary weights and leveraging modern SIMD dot product instructions, we achieve 21-52× through-
put improvements and 14× memory reduction compared to standard PyTorch implementations in
the case of the BitNet 2B model.
The key insight is that extreme quantization, restricting weights to just three values, enables a quali-
tatively different computational approach. Rather than treating quantization as an approximation to
full-precision computation, we design kernels specifically for the ternary case, eliminating floating-
point multiplication entirely and using specialized integer instructions.
Litespark-Inference packages these optimizations as a pip-installable library with automatic plat-
form detection and HuggingFace integration, making efficient ternary inference accessible to devel-
opers without specialized knowledge of SIMD programming or hardware architecture.
The results suggest that ternary models like BitNet represent a promising direction for democratizing
large language model deployment. A 2-billion parameter model that fits in 556 MB and generates
11-20 tokens per second on consumer hardware enables applications previously requiring expensive
GPU infrastructure or cloud API calls.
As ternary training techniques continue to improve and larger models become available, the perfor-
mance benefits demonstrated here will become increasingly important. The ability to run billion-
parameter models efficiently on consumer CPUs, from desktop workstations to laptops to mobile
devices, could fundamentally change how we think about deploying and using large language mod-
els.
References
[1] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU. 
en-us/data-center/h100/, 2024.
[2] OpenAI. OpenAI API Pricing.  2024.
[3] Statista. Number of PCs in use worldwide 2015-2024. 
statistics/748551/worldwide-pc-installed-base/, 2024.
[4] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. PyTorch: An Imperative
Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
[5] Hongyu Wang, Shuming Ma, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Huaijie Wang, Lingxiao Ma, Fan
Yang, Ruiping Wang, Yi Wu, and Furu Wei. BitNet: Scaling 1-bit Transformers for Large
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11453, 2023.
[6] Ayush Kaushal, Tejas Pandey, Tejas Vaidhya, Aaryan Bhagat, and Irina Rish. Spectra: A
Comprehensive Study of Ternary, Quantized, and FP16 Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.12327, 2024.
[7] Shuming Ma, Hongyu Wang, Lingxiao Ma, Lei Wang, Wenhui Wang, Shaohan Huang, Li
Dong, Ruiping Wang, Jilong Xue, and Furu Wei. The Era of 1-bit LLMs: All Large Language
Models are in 1.58 Bits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17764, 2024.
[8] Matthieu Courbariaux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jean-Pierre David. BinaryConnect: Training Deep
Neural Networks with binary weights during propagations. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS), 2015.
[9] Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. LLM.int8(): 8-bit Ma-
trix Multiplication for Transformers at Scale. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[10] Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. GPTQ: Accurate Post-
Training Quantization for Generative Pre-trained Transformers. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[11] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Xingyu Dang, and Song Han. AWQ:
Activation-aware Weight Quantization for LLM Compression and Acceleration. In MLSys,
2024. Best Paper Award.
[12] Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth, and Song Han.
SmoothQuant: Accurate and Efficient Post-Training Quantization for Large Language Models.
In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
[13] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient Fine-
tuning of Quantized LLMs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
2023.
[14] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
[15] Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt
Keutzer. A Survey of Quantization Methods for Efficient Neural Network Inference. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.13630, 2021.
[16] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All You Need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
[17] Arm
Ltd.
Arm
NEON
Intrinsics
Reference.

architectures/instruction-sets/intrinsics/, 2024.
[18] Intel
Corporation.
Intel
Deep
Learning
Boost
(Intel
DL
Boost)
Documentation.

deep-learning-boost.html, 2024.
[19] Dougall Johnson. Apple AMX Instructions.  2021.
[20] Georgi Gerganov. llama.cpp: Inference of LLaMA model in pure C/C++. 
com/ggerganov/llama.cpp, 2023.
[21] Wei Huang, Haotong Qin, Yangdong Liu, Yawei Li, Xianglong Liu, Luca Benini, Michele
Magno, and Xiaojuan Qi. T-MAC: CPU Renaissance via Table Lookup for Low-Bit LLM De-
ployment on Edge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00088, 2024.
[22] Microsoft Research. BitNet.cpp: Official inference framework for 1-bit LLMs. https://
github.com/microsoft/BitNet, 2024.
[23] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. FlashAttention: Fast
and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[24] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony
Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer,
Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain
Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-
the-Art Natural Language Processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, 2020.
[25] Microsoft Research. BitNet.cpp v2: 2-6x Faster Inference with 2-bit Kernels. https://
github.com/microsoft/BitNet/releases/tag/v1.1, 2025.
[26] Arm Holdings. Arm Ecosystem: Powering 99% of the World’s Smartphones. 
arm.com/markets/mobile, 2024.
[27] Raspberry Pi Foundation. Raspberry Pi Documentation. 
documentation/, 2024.
[28] Cass, Stephen. Taking AI to the Edge: Google, Apple, and Amazon want to put neural networks
in your devices. IEEE Spectrum, 2019.
[29] Warden, Pete and Situnayake, Daniel. TinyML: Machine Learning with TensorFlow Lite on
Arduino and Ultra-Low-Power Microcontrollers. O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[30] Xu, Daliang and Yin, Wangsong and Jin, Xin and Zhang, Ying and Wei, Shiyun and Xu,
Mengwei and Liu, Xuanzhe. LLMCad: Fast and Scalable On-device Large Language Model
Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04255, 2023.
A
Comparison with BitNet.cpp v2
Shortly after we completed Litespark-Inference, Microsoft released BitNet.cpp v2 [25], an improved
version of their inference framework that introduces optimized 2-bit kernels and achieves 2 −6×
speedups over the original implementation. We benchmarked both implementations on identical
hardware to compare their performance characteristics.
A.1
Benchmark Setup
We followed Microsoft’s pp128+tg128 methodology: processing a 128-token prompt (pp128, mea-
suring prefill speed) followed by generating 128 new tokens (tg128, measuring autoregressive gen-
eration speed). All tests used the BitNet b1.58 2B-4T model.
We tested on three platforms:
• AMD EPYC 9R14 (AWS c7a.2xlarge): 8 vCPUs, 3.7 GHz, AVX-512 VNNI
• Intel Xeon Platinum 8488C (AWS c7i.2xlarge): 8 vCPUs, 3.8 GHz, AVX-512 VNNI
• Apple M4 (MacBook Pro): 10-core CPU, ARM NEON with SDOT
For the Apple M4 platform, we present Litespark-Inference results only. We hope to see more
testing and attention from Microsoft on ARM platforms in the future, as the billions of ARM devices
worldwide, from laptops to smartphones to IoT devices, represent a critical deployment target for
efficient on-device inference [26].
A.2
x86 Results
Tables 7 and 8 present detailed results on x86 platforms. Figures 5 and 6 visualize how performance
scales with thread count.
Prefill pp128 (tok/s)
Generation tg128 (tok/s)
Threads
Original
V2
Litespark
Original
V2
Litespark
35.0
43.4
38.2
10.0
15.6
15.9
70.0
81.2
74.7
18.0
28.7
28.1
140.0
156.8
140.7
30.0
49.2
48.2
210.0
291.8
230.7
42.0
66.2
67.5
Table 7: AMD EPYC 9R14 comparison. BitNet.cpp V2 leads on prefill (1.26× faster at 8 threads),
while Litespark-Inference slightly edges ahead on token generation.
Prefill pp128 (tok/s)
Generation tg128 (tok/s)
Threads
Original
V2
Litespark
Original
V2
Litespark
27.0
43.4
59.7
10.0
13.3
13.6
40.0
65.8
85.9
13.0
19.1
19.5
55.0
77.9
110.2
16.0
24.3
25.0
79.0
101.3
120.7
20.0
29.5
28.0
Table 8: Intel Xeon Platinum 8488C comparison. Litespark-Inference achieves 1.19× higher prefill
throughput and matches token generation performance.
Figure 5: Scaling behavior on AMD EPYC 9R14. BitNet.cpp V2 shows strong prefill scaling, while
all three implementations converge on similar token generation performance at higher thread counts.
Figure 6: Scaling behavior on Intel Xeon Platinum 8488C. Litespark-Inference maintains a consis-
tent lead in prefill throughput across all thread configurations.
A.3
ARM Results (Apple Silicon)
Table 9 shows Litespark-Inference’s performance scaling on Apple M4. These results demonstrate
that efficient ternary inference is achievable on ARM platforms using NEON SDOT instructions,
with strong scaling characteristics across different thread counts.
Threads
Prefill pp128 (tok/s)
Generation tg128 (tok/s)
26.1
6.5
43.1
11.0
81.9
15.4
101.2
14.0
108.8
19.6
Table 9: Litespark-Inference performance on Apple M4. The slight dip at 8 threads for token gener-
ation recovers at 10 threads, suggesting optimal performance when utilizing all available cores.
Figure 7: Litespark-Inference scaling on Apple M4. Prefill throughput scales nearly linearly up to 4
threads, while token generation benefits from using all 10 CPU cores.
ARM-based processors have become ubiquitous, powering not only Apple’s Mac lineup but also
the vast majority of smartphones, tablets, Raspberry Pi devices, and embedded systems worldwide
[26, 27]. The combination of ARM’s energy efficiency and ternary neural networks’ reduced com-
putational requirements creates a compelling opportunity for on-device AI, enabling private, offline
inference without cloud connectivity or expensive hardware [28, 29]. We encourage Microsoft and
the broader research community to invest more attention in ARM benchmarking and optimization, as
this ecosystem represents one of the most impactful deployment targets for efficient LLM inference.
A.4
Summary
The x86 results show platform-dependent performance characteristics. BitNet.cpp V2 achieves
1.26× higher throughput than Litespark-Inference at prefill on AMD processors, while Litespark-
Inference leads by 1.19× on Intel. For token generation, the metric that determines perceived speed
during interactive use, both implementations perform comparably, with differences within 5%.
Litespark-Inference’s memory efficiency (14× reduction, fitting the 2B model in 556 MB) remains
a key differentiator, enabling deployment on memory-constrained devices common in edge and IoT
scenarios [28]. Combined with our ARM results, this positions Litespark-Inference for deployment
on billions of ARM-based devices worldwide, from MacBooks and Chromebooks to smartphones,
smart home devices, and industrial IoT systems [30]. These platforms have historically been under-
served by AI inference frameworks optimized primarily for datacenter GPUs.
The two implementations represent complementary design approaches: BitNet.cpp prioritizes raw
performance for users comfortable with C++ compilation, while Litespark-Inference emphasizes
accessibility through a simple pip install and automatic HuggingFace integration, while main-
taining competitive performance.