Operator-Guided Invariance Learning for Continuous
Reinforcement Learning
Zuyuan Zhang
The George Washington University
zuyuan.zhang@gwu.edu
Fei Xu Yu
The George Washington University
fxyu@gwu.edu
Tian Lan
The George Washington University
tlan@gwu.edu
Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) with continuous time and state/action spaces is often
data-intensive and brittle under nuisance variability and shift, motivating methods
that exploit value-preserving structures to stabilize and improve learning. Most ex-
isting approaches focus on special cases, such as prescribed symmetries and exact
equivariance, without addressing how to discover more general structures that re-
quire nonlinear operators to transform and map between continuous state/action sys-
tems with isomorphic value functions. We propose VPSD-RL (Value-Preserving
Structure Discovery for Reinforcement Learning). It models continuous RL as a
controlled diffusion with value-preserving mappings defined through Lie-group ac-
tions and associated pullback operators. We show that a value-preserving structure
exists exactly when pulling back the value function and pushing forward actions
commute with the controlled generator and reward functional. Further, approxi-
mate value-preserving structures with rigorous guarantees can be found when the
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman mismatch is small. This framework discovers exact
and approximate value-preserving structures by searching for the associated Lie
group operators. VPSD-RL fits differentiable drift, diffusion, and reward models;
learns infinitesimal generators via determining-equation residual minimization;
exponentiates them with ODE flows to obtain finite transformations; and integrates
them into continuous RL through transition augmentation and transformation-
consistency regularization. We show that bounded generator/reward mismatch
implies quantitative stability of the optimal value function along approximate or-
bits, with sensitivity governed by the effective horizon, and observe improved data
efficiency and robustness on continuous-control benchmarks.
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success across a variety of sequential decision-
making tasks, yet modern RL are known to be sample-inefficient in complex environments and brittle
under nuisance variability and shifts [Puterman, 2014, Sutton et al., 1998, Bertsekas, 2012, Kaelbling
et al., 1996, Mnih et al., 2015, Schulman et al., 2015, 2017, Haarnoja et al., 2018, Xiang et al., 2019,
Fujimoto et al., 2018, Kober et al., 2013, Levine et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2026a,b,c, 2025a]. A
key challenge is not optimization or exploration alone but also limited exploitation of underlying
structures: if transformations exist to preserve (or nearly preserve) the optimal value function, value-
learning can generalize across otherwise distinct transitions/trajectories, significantly improving
consistency, reducing complexity, and stabilizing learning [Dean and Givan, 1997, Ravindran and
Barto, 2001, 2004, Li et al., 2006]. This viewpoint subsumes prior practice such as known forms
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.06500v1 [cs.LG] 7 May 2026

of invariance-inducing structures (like symmetry, rotation, and linear scaling) and suggests a more
ambitious goal: to discover general value-preserving structures and associated transformations-both
exactly and approximately-from data and exploit them in reinforcement learning, while ensuring
rigorous guarantees on the policy performance [Tobin et al., 2017, Laskin et al., 2020a, Yarats et al.,
2021, Cohen and Welling, 2016, Bronstein et al., 2021].
This is particularly challenging in time- and state-continuous reinforcement learning, which is often
modeled as controlled diffusion, a mathematically principled model widely used in robotics, finance,
and physical processes [Oksendal, 2013, Karatzas and Shreve, 2014, Fleming and Soner, 2006, Yong
and Zhou, 1999, Borkar and Borkar, 2008, Kushner, 1990]. In this model, optimality is governed by
an operator-the controlled generator (or the induced semigroup)-and by the discounted Hamilton-
Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation in viscosity form [Crandall et al., 1992, Bardi et al., 1997, Barles,
1994]. We define value-preserving transformations/mappings by Lie-group actions (due to the
continuous spaces under consideration) and associated pullback operators. Consequently, we show
that whether a transformation is "value-preserving" must be addressed through an operator-level
question: Whether pulling back the value function (and pushing forward actions) commutes with the
controlled generator and the reward functional, exactly or approximately.
This operator-centric view provides a novel and tractable method to discover general value-preserving
structures [Fleming and Soner, 2006, Bardi et al., 1997] in time- and space continuous RL. Existing
approaches only considered certain known forms and special cases, such as exact symmetry by
equivariant RL [Cohen and Welling, 2016, Kondor and Trivedi, 2018, Weiler and Cesa, 2019, Maron
et al., 2018, Hutchinson et al., 2021, Bronstein et al., 2021] and invariant features by representation
learning [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018, Hafner et al., 2019, Laskin et al., 2020b, Stooke et al., 2021].
Data augmentation methods [Tobin et al., 2017, Laskin et al., 2020a, Yarats et al., 2021] can improve
learning robustness if the relations are already known. Classical isomorphism and homomorphism
formalize equivalence relations in MDPs, yet focusing only on discrete-time and discrete-state
problems [Dean and Givan, 1997, Ravindran and Barto, 2001, 2004, Li et al., 2006].
Our proposed approach, VPSD-RL (Value-Preserving Structure Discovery for Reinforcement Learn-
ing), defines candidate transformations through an exact or approximate commutation property with
respect to the controlled generator and reward function, using the discounted HJB operator [Fleming
and Soner, 2006, Crandall et al., 1992, Bardi et al., 1997]. Algorithmically, VPSD-RL: (1) learns
infinitesimal generators by minimizing determining-equation residuals; (2) exponentiates the learned
vector fields via ODE flows to obtain finite transformations; and (3) injects these transformations into
RL through transition augmentation and a transformation-consistency regularizer for value/policy
networks [Olver, 1993, Bluman et al., 1989, Ibragimov, 2024, Lee, 2003]. A notable byproduct
is that, when the discovered structure integrates to a (local) group action, it recovers classical Lie
symmetries as a special case rather than a design premise [Olver, 1993, Bluman et al., 1989].
Theoretically, we prove that exact value-preserving structure implies exact value invariance of the
optimal value, while approximate generator/reward mismatch yields the stability bound вҲҘV вӢҶв—Ұ
gП‘ вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨ1
ОІ

Оөr + ОөLвҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘC2

. We further establish end-to-end guarantees for the VPSD-RL
pipeline: stochastic structure discovery converges to approximate stationary points at standard SGD
rates, learned infinitesimal generators are statistically consistent under realizability, numerical flow
integration has order-hp error, and exact/approximate transition augmentation respectively preserves
the Bellman fixed point or perturbs it by a controlled amount. VPSD-RL demonstrates improved data
efficiency and robustness on representative continuous-control benchmarks [Fujimoto et al., 2018,
Haarnoja et al., 2018].
Preliminaries
Discounted MDPs on Continuous State-Action Spaces. Let S and A be Borel subsets of Rd and
Rm (or, more generally, Polish spaces equipped with their Borel Пғ-algebras). A discounted Markov
decision process (MDP) is M = (S, A, P, r, Оі) with Оі вҲҲ(0, 1), where P(В· | s, a) is a Markov
transition kernel on S and r : S Г— A вҶ’R is a measurable reward bounded by |r(s, a)| вүӨRmax.
A (stationary Markov) policy ПҖ(В· | s) is a stochastic kernel on A given s вҲҲS. The value function
of ПҖ is V ПҖ(s) = EПҖhP
tвүҘ0 Оіtr(st, at)
 s0 = s
i
,
at вҲјПҖ(В· | st), st+1 вҲјP(В· | st, at), and the
optimal value is V вӢҶ(s) = supПҖ V ПҖ(s). In finite-state MDPs, exact value-preserving correspondences
are often represented by permutations or homomorphisms. Because S, A are continuous, we work
with smooth local transformation families on S and A. Lie-group actions provide one important
special case and one convenient parameterization of transformation families used in our analysis,
while stronger invertibility or closure properties can recover isomorphism-type correspondences
within the broader value-preserving structure considered here.
Controlled Diffusions, Semigroups, and Generators. Let S вҠҶRd and A вҠҶRm be open sets (or
smooth manifolds with local coordinates). Consider infinite-horizon controlled diffusion in ItГҙ form
dst = b(st, at) dt + ОЈ(st, at) dWt,
(1)
where Wt вҲҲRq is standard Brownian motion, b : S Г— A вҶ’Rd is the drift, and ОЈ : S Г— A вҶ’RdГ—q
is the diffusion coefficient. We use the same bounded reward r : S Г— A вҶ’R and fix a discount rate
ОІ > 0. For a (possibly stochastic) Markov control at вҲјПҖ(В· | st), define the discounted return
V ПҖ(s) = EПҖ
Z вҲһ
eвҲ’ОІtr(st, at) dt
 s0 = s

,
V вӢҶ(s) = sup
ПҖ V ПҖ(s).
(2)
For each fixed action a вҲҲA, the associated infinitesimal generator La acts on f вҲҲC2(S) by
(Laf)(s) = b(s, a) В· вҲҮf(s) + 1
2 tr

Q(s, a) вҲҮ2f(s)

,
Q(s, a) := ОЈ(s, a)ОЈ(s, a)вҠӨ.
(3)
Let (P a
t )tвүҘ0 be the Markov semigroup under constant control a:
(P a
t f)(s) = E

f(st)
 s0 = s, au вүЎa for u вҲҲ[0, t]

.
(4)
Intuitively, P a
t propagates functions forward in time under fixed dynamics, while La captures the
first-order infinitesimal change: formally, d
dtP a
t f = LaP a
t f whenever the derivative is justified.
Lie-Group Actions and Pullback Operators Let G be a Lie group acting smoothly on the state
and action spaces through maps gОё : S вҶ’S and hОё : A вҶ’A for Оё вҲҲG, where each gОё is a
diffeomorphism and each hОё is an invertible smooth map. We define the pullback operator UgОё on
functions f : S вҶ’R by
(UgОёf)(s) = f(gОё(s)).
(5)
We emphasize that we adopt the convention Ugf = f в—Ұg (rather than f в—ҰgвҲ’1). With this choice,
(Ugf)(s) means: first move the state by the symmetry g, then evaluate f. This is the operator that
naturally appears when expressing equivariance of generators/semigroups in pointwise form, e.g.,
comparing (Lh(a)(Ugf))(s) with (Ug(Laf))(s).
Viscosity HJB Basics and Well-Posedness Define the Hamiltonian operator on bounded continuous
functions V : S вҶ’R by
(HV )(s) = sup
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a) + (LaV )(s)
o
,
(6)
and consider the discounted Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation
ОІV (s) = (HV )(s).
(7)
Under the dynamic programming principle, the optimal value V вӢҶin (2) is characterized as the unique
bounded viscosity solution of (7). We use viscosity solutions because V вӢҶneed not be C2 even when
the coefficients are smooth; viscosity theory provides a robust notion of solution and a comparison
principle that yields uniqueness.
Theorem 2.1 (Existence and uniqueness of the optimal value). Under the HJB well-posedness
conditions stated in Assumption B.9, the HJB equation (7) admits a unique bounded viscosity solution.
Moreover, this solution coincides with the optimal value function V вӢҶdefined in (2).
This well-posedness is the formal anchor for our value-preservation analysis: once the transformed
controlled generator and reward leave the HJB operator unchanged, uniqueness forces the optimal
value function to inherit the corresponding value-preserving relation. Subsequent sections use this
uniqueness-to-value-preservation logic repeatedly.
3
Value-Preserving Structure and Reduction for Controlled Diffusion
We characterize exact value-preserving structure of controlled diffusions at the level of the controlled
generator (equivalently, the Markov semigroup), which directly links to the discounted HJB equation
and avoids discretization dependence. Differentiating operator equivariance along one-parameter
transformation families yields the determining equations, i.e., PDE constraints on drift, diffusion,
and reward. This structure induces an intrinsic reduction via invariants, leading to value invariance
along transformation orbits and structure-consistent optimal policies under mild conditions.
3.1
Exact Value-Preserving Structure
Definition 3.1 (Exact value-preserving structure). Let G be a Lie group acting smoothly on states and
actions via (gП‘, hП‘), П‘ вҲҲG. We say (gП‘, hП‘) is an exact value-preserving structure of the controlled
diffusion if, for all П‘ вҲҲG, all a вҲҲA, and all f вҲҲC2(S),
La(f в—ҰgП‘) = (LhП‘(a)f) в—ҰgП‘,
equivalently
LaUgП‘ = UgП‘LhП‘(a),
(8)
and
r(gП‘(s), hП‘(a)) = r(s, a),
вҲҖ(s, a) вҲҲS Г— A.
(9)
Equation (8) is the generator-level value-preservation condition: evolving after transforming (s, a)
is equivalent, as seen through test functions, to transforming the outcome of evolution. In classical
group-symmetry settings, this operator-commutation condition coincides with generator equivariance;
here we use it as a criterion for value preservation. Crucially, since La depends on the diffusion only
through Q = ОЈОЈвҠӨ, the definition is intrinsic to the induced Markov process and does not depend on
a particular factorization ОЈ.
Lemma 3.2 (Semigroup form of exact value preservation). Assume for each a вҲҲA that (P a
t )tвүҘ0 is a
strongly continuous Markov semigroup on a Banach space F, and La is its generator with domain
Dom(La) вҠҮC2(S) вҲ©F. Then Eq. 8 implies, for all t вүҘ0,
P a
t UgП‘ = UgП‘P hП‘(a)
t
.
(10)
Conversely, if this semigroup identity holds for all t вүҘ0 and all f вҲҲDom(LhП‘(a)), then Eq. 8 holds
on the corresponding generator domain.
The semigroup identity (10) compares the full time-t evolution under constant control. The generator
form (8) is the infinitesimal version that is algebraically convenient for deriving determining equations
and for interfacing with the HJB operator.
3.2
Determining Equations: From Global Value Preservation to Local PDE Constraints
To obtain explicit value-preservation constraints on (b, Q, r), we differentiate the operator identity in
Definition 3.1 along a one-parameter subgroup. This yields linear PDE conditions, the determining
equations, on the infinitesimal generators (X, Y ).
Consider a one-parameter subgroup {П‘Пө}ПөвҲҲR вҠҶG with П‘0 = e (the identity), and define the
infinitesimal generators
X(s) = d
dПөgП‘Пө(s)

Пө=0
вҲҲTsS вҲј= Rd,
Y (a) = d
dПөhП‘Пө(a)

Пө=0
вҲҲTaA вҲј= Rm.
(11)
Theorem 3.3 (Determining equations (necessity, ItГҙ form under Ugf = f в—Ұg)). Assume b, Q, r are
differentiable and (gП‘, hП‘) is an exact value-preserving structure in the sense of Definition 3.1. Then
for all (s, a) вҲҲS Г— A,
X(s) В· вҲҮsr(s, a) + Y (a) В· вҲҮar(s, a) = 0,
(12)
вҲҮsb(s, a) X(s) вҲ’(вҲҮsX(s)) b(s, a) + вҲҮab(s, a) Y (a) вҲ’1
2 вҲҶQ(s,a)X(s) = 0,
(13)
вҲҮsQ(s, a)[X(s)] вҲ’(вҲҮsX(s)) Q(s, a) вҲ’Q(s, a) (вҲҮsX(s))вҠӨ+ вҲҮaQ(s, a)[Y (a)] = 0, (14)
where
вҲҮsQ(s, a)[X]
denotes
the
directional
derivative
of
the
matrix
field
Q(В·, a)
at
s
along
direction
X(s),
similarly
for
вҲҮaQ(s, a)[Y ],
and
вҲҶQX
:=
 tr(Q вҲҮ2
sX1), . . . , tr(Q вҲҮ2
sXd)
вҠӨ,
tr(Q вҲҮ2
sXk) = Pd
i,j=1 Qij вҲӮijXk. In particular, if gП‘Пө
is affine in s (equivalently вҲҮ2
sX вүЎ0), then the ItГҙ correction вҲҶQX vanishes and (13) reduces to the
first-order Lie-bracket form.
Our value-preserving definition is posed at the level of the generator (8), which depends on the
diffusion only through Q = ОЈОЈвҠӨ. Therefore, the intrinsic necessary condition is (14). A condition
written directly for ОЈ would be strictly stronger and generally not necessary, because different ОЈ
factorizations can induce the same Q and hence the same generator.
Theorem 3.4 (Local sufficiency). Assume b, Q, r are smooth. Let X and Y be smooth vector fields
such that (12), (13), and (14) hold on an open set в„ҰвҠҶS Г— A. Assume the flows gПө and hПө generated
by the ODEs
d
dПөgПө(s) = X(gПө(s)) and
d
dПөhПө(a) = Y (hПө(a)) exist and are diffeomorphisms for
|Пө| < Пө0. Then (gПө, hПө) is an exact value-preserving structure on в„Ұfor all |Пө| < Пө0.
Theorem 3.3 converts a global value-preserving operator identity into local PDE constraints on the
coefficients. Theorem 3.4 states the converse: if the PDE constraints hold and the induced flows exist,
then integrating the infinitesimal generators recovers local value preservation. Together, they justify
treating value-preserving structure discovery as solving the determining equations.
3.3
Intrinsic Reduction by Invariants and Constraints
From value-preserving directions to reduced coordinates.
Once value-preserving directions are
characterized by vector fields X1, . . . , XK, we can reduce the effective state dimension by passing
to invariant coordinates that are constant along transformation orbits. This gives a coordinate-free
description of the orbit space without explicitly constructing the quotient S/G.
Let X1, . . . , XK be linearly independent infinitesimal state generators and define the distribution
D(s) = span{X1(s), . . . , XK(s)} вҠҶTsS.
(15)
A scalar function I : S вҶ’R is an invariant if it is constant along D:
Xk(s) В· вҲҮI(s) = 0,
k = 1, . . . , K.
(16)
Theorem 3.5 (Frobenius reduction and invariant coordinates). Assume D is a smooth distribution
of constant rank K on a neighborhood, and it is involutive: [Xi, Xj](s) вҲҲD(s) for all i, j and
all s in that neighborhood. Then locally there exist (d вҲ’K) functionally independent invariants
I1, . . . , IdвҲ’K whose joint map I(s) = (I1(s), . . . , IdвҲ’K(s)) is constant on the integral leaves of
D. In particular, the local orbit space can be represented intrinsically by the invariant coordinates
z = I(s), without explicitly constructing a quotient S/G.
Let the feasible set be Sfeas = {s : c(s) = 0, g(s) вүӨ0} for smooth constraints (c, g). A sufficient
local condition for the value-preserving directions to preserve feasibility is tangency at feasible points:
вҲҮc(s) Xk(s) = 0,
вҲҮgв„“(s) Xk(s) вүӨ0 on active constraints (gв„“(s) = 0),
вҲҖk, в„“.
(17)
Under (17), the flow of each Xk stays in Sfeas for small time, so one can solve (16) restricted to Sfeas
to obtain invariant coordinates for the post-constraint state space.
3.4
Value Invariance and Structure-Consistent Policies
From value preservation to control structure.
We now connect the generator-level value-
preserving condition to consequences for optimal control. The key step is that exact value preservation
leaves the HJB operator unchanged: reward compatibility and the generator-level condition imply
H(UgП‘V ) = UgП‘(HV ), where invertibility of hП‘ ensures the supremum over actions is preserved.
Then, by uniqueness of bounded viscosity solutions (Theorem 2.1), the optimal value must be
invariant along the transformation orbit.
Theorem 3.6 (Exact value-preserving structure implies value invariance). Assume Assumption B.9
and let (gП‘, hП‘) satisfy the exact structure conditions of Definition 3.1. Then the optimal value
satisfies
V вӢҶ(gП‘(s)) = V вӢҶ(s),
вҲҖП‘ вҲҲG, вҲҖs вҲҲS.
(18)
Moreover, if I is a complete invariant coordinate map as in Theorem 3.5, then locally there exists ВҜV вӢҶ
such that V вӢҶ(s) = ВҜV вӢҶ(I(s)).
Value invariance already implies that the control problem effectively lives on the reduced coordinates
z = I(s). To make this operational at the policy level, one often seeks a structure-consistent optimal
selector.
Corollary 3.7 (Orbit-consistent optimal actions (measurable selector form)). In addition to As-
sumption B.9, assume that for each s the maximizer set Argmax(s) := arg maxaвҲҲA{ r(s, a) +
(LaV вӢҶ)(s) } is nonempty and admits a measurable selector aвӢҶ(s) вҲҲArgmax(s). Then for any
П‘ вҲҲG, a вҲҲArgmax(s)
=вҮ’
hП‘(a) вҲҲArgmax(gП‘(s)). In particular, one can choose an
optimal selector satisfying the structure-consistency relation aвӢҶ(gП‘(s)) = hП‘(aвӢҶ(s)) on any neigh-
borhood where such a selector exists.
A concrete planar-rotation instance, together with its visualization, is provided in Appendix C.
Approximate Value-Preserving Structure and Stability of the Optimal Value
Exact value-preserving structure implies exact value invariance along transformation orbits (Section 3).
Here we define approximate value-preserving structure by bounding the controlled-generator and
reward mismatch over a test-function class, and show that it yields a corresponding approximate value-
invariance bound. The error scales linearly with the mismatch and is amplified by 1/ОІ, reflecting
increased sensitivity under weaker discounting.
4.1
Approximate Value-Preserving Structure as Bounded Operator Mismatch
Exact value-preserving equalities may be too strict in data-driven or partially observed systems.
We therefore quantify value preservation through bounded mismatch of the transformed controlled
generator and reward.
Definition 4.1 ((ОөL, Оөr)-approximate value-preserving structure). Fix a test-function class F вҠҶ
C2(S) and the (standard) C2 norm вҲҘfвҲҘC2 := вҲҘfвҲҘвҲһ+ вҲҘвҲҮfвҲҘвҲһ+ вҲҘвҲҮ2fвҲҘвҲһ. We say (gП‘, hП‘) is an
(ОөL, Оөr)-approximate value-preserving structure if for all П‘ вҲҲG, all a вҲҲA, and all f вҲҲF,
La(f в—ҰgП‘) вҲ’(LhП‘(a)f) в—ҰgП‘

вҲһвүӨПөLвҲҘfвҲҘC2.
(19)
and for all (s, a) вҲҲS Г— A,
r(gП‘(s), hП‘(a)) вҲ’r(s, a)
 вүӨОөr.
(20)
Condition (19) measures how far the transformed dynamics deviate from exact generator-level value
preservation as seen through a function class F. The scaling by вҲҘfвҲҘC2 is natural because Laf
involves first and second derivatives of f through b В· вҲҮf and tr(QвҲҮ2f). Condition (20) separately
controls violations of reward compatibility.
4.2
From Approximate Value Preservation to Approximate Value Invariance
Under exact value preservation, reward compatibility and the generator-level value-preserving condi-
tion imply that the HJB operator H commutes with pullbacks: H(UgП‘V ) = UgП‘(HV ). With approx-
imate value preservation, we obtain an inequality controlling the HJB commutator HUgП‘ вҲ’UgП‘H,
which then translates into a bound on V вӢҶв—ҰgП‘ вҲ’V вӢҶvia the discounted comparison principle.
Theorem 4.2 (Approximate value-preserving structure implies approximate value invariance). As-
sume Assumption B.9. Let (gП‘, hП‘) be an (ОөL, Оөr)-approximate value-preserving structure in the
sense of Definition 4.1. Assume additionally that V вӢҶвҲҲC2(S) вҲ©F. Then for all П‘ вҲҲG,
вҲҘV вӢҶв—ҰgП‘ вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨ1
ОІ

Оөr + ОөLвҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘC2

.
(21)
The bound (21) is intentionally stated in a strong-regularity regime (V вӢҶвҲҲC2) so that the generator
mismatch in (19) can be evaluated on V вӢҶdirectly. In general, V вӢҶmay only be a viscosity solu-
tion; extending (21) to that setting typically requires replacing вҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘC2 by an appropriate smooth
approximation argument (or a stability theorem for viscosity solutions under perturbations of the
Hamiltonian).
5
Our VPSD-RL Algorithm
To develop VPSD-RL, we learn infinitesimal generators (X, Y ) by minimizing empirical determining-
equation residuals from differentiable environment models, exponentiate them via ODE flows to
obtain finite transforms (gОұ, hОұ), and use these transforms for RL via (i) transition augmentation and
(ii) transformation-consistency regularization. Algorithm 1 in Appendix gives the full procedure.
Learning Infinitesimal Generators from Data Let ЛҶbПү, ЛҶОЈПү, ЛҶrПү be differentiable parametric models
of (b, ОЈ, r). Since the controlled generator depends on the diffusion only through Q = ОЈОЈвҠӨ, we work
with the induced diffusion matrix model ЛҶQПү(s, a) := ЛҶОЈПү(s, a)ЛҶОЈПү(s, a)вҠӨвҲҲRdГ—d. We parameterize
infinitesimal generators by XОё : S вҶ’Rd and YП• : A вҶ’Rm.
Motivated by Theorem 3.3, define residuals
Rr(s, a) := XОё(s) В· вҲҮsЛҶrПү(s, a) + YП•(a) В· вҲҮaЛҶrПү(s, a),
(22)
Rb(s, a) := вҲҮsЛҶbПү(s, a)XОё(s) вҲ’(вҲҮsXОё(s))ЛҶbПү(s, a) + вҲҮaЛҶbПү(s, a)YП•(a) вҲ’1
2вҲҶЛҶ
QПү(s,a)XОё(s).
(23)
RQ(s, a) := вҲҮs ЛҶQПү(s, a)[XОё(s)]
(24)
вҲ’(вҲҮsXОё(s)) ЛҶQПү(s, a) вҲ’ЛҶQПү(s, a)(вҲҮsXОё(s))вҠӨ+ вҲҮa ЛҶQПү(s, a)[YП•(a)].
(25)
Here вҲҮs ЛҶQПү(s, a)[X] denotes the directional derivative of the matrix field ЛҶQПү(В·, a) at s along direction
XОё(s), and similarly for вҲҮa ЛҶQПү(s, a)[Y ]. In the experiments, the generator class is restricted to affine
or locally linear vector fields, so the ItГҙ correction term вҲҶЛҶ
QПүXОё vanishes. For general nonlinear
generator classes, Rb should include the additional вҲ’1
2вҲҶЛҶ
QПүXОё term from Theorem 3.3.
We minimize a weighted squared residual loss over a replay distribution ПҒ(s, a):
min
Оё,П• E(s,a)вҲјПҒ
h
вҲҘRb(s, a)вҲҘ2
2 + О»QвҲҘRQ(s, a)вҲҘ2
F + О»r|Rr(s, a)|2i
+ О»nrm

EsвҲјПҒSвҲҘXОё(s)вҲҘ2
2 вҲ’1
2
,
(26)
where ПҒS is the state marginal of ПҒ. The normalization penalty prevents the trivial zero-field solution
and fixes the overall scale of XОё. (When learning multiple generators, one may additionally impose
orthonormality constraints E[Xi В· Xj] = Оҙij to fix a basis of the symmetry algebra.)
The residuals in (22) enforce the infinitesimal determining equations. After exponentiation (Section 5),
small residuals imply that the finite-step transforms (gОұ, hОұ) yield small generator mismatch for
small |Оұ| (up to model and numerical integration errors), thereby providing a concrete path from
minimizing (26) to reducing (ОөL, Оөr) in Definition 4.1.
Exponentiation via Flow Integration Given learned infinitesimal generators (XОё, YП•), we obtain
finite transformations by integrating their flows (i.e., exponentiating in the Lie sense):
d
dОұgОұ(s) = XОё(gОұ(s)),
g0(s) = s,
d
dОұhОұ(a) = YП•(hОұ(a)),
h0(a) = a.
(27)
In practice, we integrate (27) numerically for small |Оұ|. If S or A is constrained (e.g., box constraints),
we apply a projection/retraction after each solver step to keep the iterates feasible.
Value-Preserving Reinforcement Learning Updates.
Once a finite transformation (gОұ, hОұ) is available, we use it in RL in two complementary
ways. First, transition augmentation maps collected samples (s, a, sвҖІ, r) to transformed samples
(gОұ(s), hОұ(a), gОұ(sвҖІ), r), allowing the replay buffer to share experience along discovered value-
preserving orbits. Second, transformation-consistency regularization encourages the learned value
and policy networks to make compatible predictions on transformed state-action pairs. Under exact
value preservation these operations are structure-preserving data-sharing steps; under approximate
value preservation their effect is controlled by the mismatch bounds in Section 4. Detailed losses and
implementation choices are deferred to Appendix A.1.
Algorithm 1 in Appendix alternates among (i) data collection with the current policy, (ii) optional en-
vironment model fitting to obtain differentiable ЛҶbПү, ЛҶQПү, ЛҶrПү, (iii) value-preserving structure discovery
by minimizing (26) using automatic differentiation, and (iv) RL updates using augmentation and/or
transformation-consistency regularization with the induced finite transforms.
0
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Rr2
Determining-residual convergence
PostConstraint-Rot2D-v0
Ref2D-DoubleWell-v0
Rot2D-Point-v0
(a) Rot2D
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
RQ2
Alignment between learned and ground-truth generators
PostConstraint-Rot2D-v0
Ref2D-DoubleWell-v0
Rot2D-Point-v0
(b) Q-res.
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Rb2
Value non-invariance |V(s)
V(g (s))|
PostConstraint-Rot2D-v0
Ref2D-DoubleWell-v0
Rot2D-Point-v0
(c) b-res.
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v1
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(d) SymNav-V1
Figure 1: Diagnostics on interpretable controlled diffusions and one representative SymNav-15
variant. The first panels show determining-residual convergence, generator alignment, and value
non-invariance diagnostics for systems with known value-preserving transformations. The last panel
shows a representative learning curve on SymNav-V1. Curves report mean Вұ standard error over
seeds.
Guarantees of VPSD-RL
We establish an end-to-end guarantees for VPSD-RL which connects (i) learning decision-preserving
infinitesimal generators from data, (ii) exponentiating them into finite transformations, and (iii)
injecting these transformations into RL. The full formal statements (assumptions, theorems, and
proof sketches) are provided in Appendix B.
Optimization guarantee. Theorem B.2 shows that stochastic optimization of the structure-discovery
objective reaches approximate stationary points under standard smoothness and bounded-variance
conditions:
T
PT вҲ’1
t=0 E

вҲҘвҲҮLsym(Оёt, П•t)вҲҘ2

вүӨ
 Lsym(Оё0,П•0)вҲ’Linf

О·T
+ О·LПғ2, and diminishing step-
sizes give the standard O(1/
вҲҡ
T) stationarity rate.
Statistical consistency. Theorem B.4 states that, under realizability and consistent environment-
model estimation, learned generators converge in ПҒ-mean to solutions of the determining equations.
Consequently, the induced generator and reward mismatches satisfy ОөL вҶ’0 and Оөr вҶ’0 on the data
support.
Exact augmentation. Theorem B.7 gives a discrete-time contraction analogue: if the augmentation
is exactly value-preserving, Bellman backups computed from augmented samples preserve the same
optimal Bellman operator, so tabular value iteration keeps the usual convergence rate вҲҘVk вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨ
ОіkвҲҘV0 вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ.
Approximate augmentation. Theorem B.8 shows that if augmentation is only (ОөP , Оөr)-approximate,
the perturbed Bellman operator remains a Оі-contraction and its fixed point satisfies вҲҘЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨ
1вҲ’Оі (Оөr + Оі ОөP вҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ) . The numerical flow approximation guarantee, which bounds вҲҘЛҶgОұ вҲ’gОұвҲҘ
and вҲҘЛҶhОұ вҲ’hОұвҲҘby order hp, is stated in Theorem B.6 in the appendix.
Experiments
Our experiments provide supporting evidence for the value-preserving structure theory in Sections 3-6.
We evaluate whether (i) infinitesimal generators can be recovered from data through determining-
equation residual minimization, (ii) the induced finite transformations yield small operator mismatch
and value non-invariance, and (iii) using the discovered transformations improves sample efficiency
and robustness in continuous-control RL. We report episodic return as a function of environment
steps, final performance over the last evaluation window, area under the learning curve (AUC) up to a
fixed budget, and wall-clock cost. For interpretable systems with known ground-truth generators, we
additionally report residual statistics EвҲҘRbвҲҘ2
2, EвҲҘRQвҲҘ2
F , E|Rr|2, generator alignment, and empirical
value non-invariance Es,Оұ|V (s) вҲ’V (gОұ(s))|. Full environment descriptions, hyperparameters,
ablations, and all extended curves are deferred to Appendix D.
Figure 1 supports the mechanism predicted by the theory. On interpretable controlled diffusions,
minimizing the determining-equation residuals recovers transformation directions aligned with
the known generators and reduces empirical value non-invariance along the learned flow. On the
representative SymNav-15 task, using the learned transformations improves sample efficiency relative
0
1.0M
2.0M
3.0M
4.0M
5.0M
Env steps
500
1500
2500
3500
Eval return
MJ-Hopper-v4
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(a) Hopper-v4
1.0M
2.0M
3.0M
4.0M
5.0M
Env steps
1000
3000
5000
Eval return
MJ-Walker2d-v4
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(b) Walker2d-v4
1.0M
2.0M
3.0M
4.0M
5.0M
Env steps
0
4000
Eval return
MJ-Ant-v4
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(c) Ant-v4
Figure 2: MuJoCo locomotion performance on Hopper-v4, Walker2d-v4, and Ant-v4. Curves
report mean Вұ standard error over seeds.
Table 1:
Compact quantitative
summary on Ant-v4. Numbers
are mean Вұ std over seeds. Fi-
nal return is averaged over the last
evaluation window; AUC is com-
puted over a fixed step budget;
wall-clock is seconds per 105 en-
vironment steps.
Method
Final return вҶ‘
AUC@B вҶ‘
Wall-clock вҶ“
A2C
-790.30Вұ103.76
-388.66Вұ127.69
391Вұ113
DDPG
2637.74Вұ1385.82
924.95Вұ307.18
437Вұ8
PPO
1922.56Вұ615.62
1414.10Вұ205.77
215Вұ0
SAC
4477.82Вұ677.98
1227.46Вұ172.73
397Вұ159
TD3
3984.84Вұ1111.78
1463.37Вұ123.77
767Вұ77
DynRand
5149.99Вұ110.37
1440.34Вұ152.56
434Вұ108
RARL
4903.49Вұ615.20
1558.29Вұ227.95
619Вұ119
EPOpt
3872.36Вұ89.81
1533.66Вұ254.87
343Вұ81
VPSD-RL (Aug+Reg)
5822.15Вұ470.25
1653.21Вұ336.34
471Вұ161
to standard continuous-control baselines, suggesting that the recovered structure is useful beyond the
synthetic diagnostic setting.
Figure 2 shows that the benefit of VPSD-RL is task-dependent but consistent with the amount of
reusable structure in the task. The gain is modest on Hopper-v4, whose dominant structure is a single
hopping template; clearer gains appear on Walker2d-v4, where left-right phase correspondence
creates reusable coordination; and the strongest improvement appears on Ant-v4, where multi-limb
coordination produces richer approximately value-preserving transformation patterns. Thus the
structural summary previously reported as a separate table can be stated directly in text.
The compact comparison in Table 1 shows that VPSD-RL improves final return and AUC on Ant-v4
while adding moderate computational overhead. Detailed aggregate results for all SymNav-15
variants, full MuJoCo curves, robustness baselines, and ablations are provided in Appendix D. These
empirical diagnostics are used as reliability checks for the discovered transformations, rather than as
an assumption that every continuous-control task admits a useful global symmetry.
Conclusion
We introduced VPSD-RL, an operator-level framework for discovering and exploiting value-
preserving structure in continuous-time reinforcement learning. Rather than assuming a prescribed
symmetry, VPSD-RL defines exact and approximate value preservation through commutation of
the transformed controlled generator and reward with the HJB operator, making classical Lie sym-
metries a special case. We showed that exact value-preserving structure implies value invariance,
while bounded generator/reward mismatch yields quantitative stability of the optimal value along
approximate orbits. We then turned these principles into a practical pipeline that learns infinitesimal
generators from data, exponentiates them into finite transformations, and uses them for transition
augmentation and transformation-consistency regularization. The resulting theory and experiments
suggest that value-preserving structure discovery can improve data efficiency and robustness in
continuous-control RL, especially when useful transformations are present but not known in advance.
These gains should be interpreted under the stated local-modeling assumptions: the learned flows are
local and their reliability is assessed through residual and invariance diagnostics. Limitations and
broader impacts are discussed in Appendix.
References
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John Wiley & Sons,
2014.
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT press
Cambridge, 1998.
Dimitri Bertsekas. Dynamic programming and optimal control: Volume I, volume 4. Athena scientific, 2012.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Andrew W Moore. Reinforcement learning: A survey. Journal
of artificial intelligence research, 4:237-285, 1996.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex
Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep
reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529-533, 2015.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region policy
optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1889-1897. PMLR, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum
entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference on machine learning,
pages 1861-1870. Pmlr, 2018.
Jiaqi Xiang, Qingdong Li, Xiwang Dong, and Zhang Ren. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning
for mobile robot navigation. In 2019 Chinese Automation Congress (CAC), pages 1501-1506. IEEE, 2019.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods.
In International conference on machine learning, pages 1587-1596. PMLR, 2018.
Jens Kober, J Andrew Bagnell, and Jan Peters. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 32(11):1238-1274, 2013.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial, review,
and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Zuyuan Zhang, Sizhe Tang, and Tian Lan. Cochain perspectives on temporal-difference signals for learning
beyond markov dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06939, 2026a.
Zuyuan Zhang, Mahdi Imani, and Tian Lan. Geometry of drifting mdps with path-integral stability certificates.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21991, 2026b.
Zuyuan Zhang, Zeyu Fang, and Tian Lan. Structuring value representations via geometric coherence in markov
decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02978, 2026c.
Zuyuan Zhang, Hanhan Zhou, Mahdi Imani, Taeyoung Lee, and Tian Lan. Learning to collaborate with unknown
agents in the absence of reward. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39,
pages 14502-14511, 2025a.
Thomas Dean and Robert Givan. Model minimization in markov decision processes. In AAAI/IAAI, pages
106-111, 1997.
Balaraman Ravindran and Andrew G Barto. Symmetries and model minimization in markov decision processes,
2001.
Balaraman Ravindran and Andrew G Barto. Approximate homomorphisms: A framework for non-exact
minimization in markov decision processes. 2004.
Lihong Li, Thomas J Walsh, and Michael L Littman. Towards a unified theory of state abstraction for mdps.
AI&M, 1(2):3, 2006.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain randomiza-
tion for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ international
conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pages 23-30. IEEE, 2017.
Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Reinforcement
learning with augmented data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:19884-19895, 2020a.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous control: Improved
data-augmented reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09645, 2021.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International conference on
machine learning, pages 2990-2999. PMLR, 2016.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar VeliЛҮckoviВҙc. Geometric deep learning: Grids, groups,
graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
Bernt Oksendal. Stochastic differential equations: an introduction with applications. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2013.
Ioannis Karatzas and Steven Shreve. Brownian motion and stochastic calculus. springer, 2014.
Wendell H Fleming and H Mete Soner. Controlled Markov processes and viscosity solutions. Springer, 2006.
Jiongmin Yong and Xun Yu Zhou. Stochastic controls: Hamiltonian systems and HJB equations, volume 43.
Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.
Vivek S Borkar and Vivek S Borkar. Stochastic approximation: a dynamical systems viewpoint, volume 100.
Springer, 2008.
Harold J Kushner. Numerical methods for stochastic control problems in continuous time. SIAM Journal on
Control and Optimization, 28(5):999-1048, 1990.
Michael G Crandall, Hitoshi Ishii, and Pierre-Louis Lions. UserвҖҷs guide to viscosity solutions of second order
partial differential equations. Bulletin of the American mathematical society, 27(1):1-67, 1992.
Martino Bardi, Italo Capuzzo Dolcetta, et al. Optimal control and viscosity solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equations, volume 12. Springer, 1997.
Guy Barles. Solutions de viscositГ© des Г©quations de Hamilton-Jacobi, volume 17. Springer, 1994.
Risi Kondor and Shubhendu Trivedi. On the generalization of equivariance and convolution in neural networks
to the action of compact groups. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2747-2755. PMLR,
2018.
Maurice Weiler and Gabriele Cesa. General e (2)-equivariant steerable cnns. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 32, 2019.
Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and equivariant graph networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09902, 2018.
Michael J Hutchinson, Charline Le Lan, Sheheryar Zaidi, Emilien Dupont, Yee Whye Teh, and Hyunjik Kim.
Lietransformer: Equivariant self-attention for lie groups. In International conference on machine learning,
pages 4533-4543. PMLR, 2021.
David Ha and JГјrgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2(3):440, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors
by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representations for
reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 5639-5650. PMLR, 2020b.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning from
reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 9870-9879. PMLR, 2021.
Peter J Olver. Applications of Lie groups to differential equations, volume 107. Springer Science & Business
Media, 1993.
George W Bluman, Sukeyuki Kumei, and GW Bluman. Symmetries and differential equations, volume 81.
Springer, 1989.
Nail H Ibragimov. CRC Handbook of Lie Group Analysis of Differential Equations, Volume III. CRC press,
2024.
John M Lee. Smooth manifolds. In Introduction to smooth manifolds, pages 1-29. Springer, 2003.
Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of robotic
control with dynamics randomization. In 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation
(ICRA), pages 3803-3810. IEEE, 2018.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforcement learning.
In International conference on machine learning, pages 2817-2826. PMLR, 2017.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Sarvjeet Ghotra, Balaraman Ravindran, and Sergey Levine. Epopt: Learning robust neural
network policies using model ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01283, 2016.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012
IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pages 5026-5033. IEEE, 2012.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and Wojciech
Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Zuyuan Zhang, Mahdi Imani, and Tian Lan. Modeling other players with bayesian beliefs for games with
incomplete information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14122, 2024.
Zuyuan Zhang, Vaneet Aggarwal, and Tian Lan. Network diffuser for placing-scheduling service function chains
with inverse demonstration. In IEEE INFOCOM 2025-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
pages 1-10. IEEE, 2025b.
Zuyuan Zhang and Tian Lan. Lipschitz lifelong monte carlo tree search for mastering non-stationary tasks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00633, 2025.
Zuyuan Zhang, Arnob Ghosh, and Tian Lan. Tail-risk-safe monte carlo tree search under pac-level guarantees.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05441, 2025c.
Zeyu Fang, Zuyuan Zhang, Mahdi Imani, and Tian Lan. Manifold-constrained energy-based transition models
for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02900, 2026.
Jing Qiao, Zuyuan Zhang, Sheng Yue, Yuan Yuan, Zhipeng Cai, Xiao Zhang, Ju Ren, and Dongxiao Yu.
Br-defedrl: Byzantine-robust decentralized federated reinforcement learning with fast convergence and
communication efficiency. In IEEE infocom 2024-IEEE conference on computer communications, pages
141-150. IEEE, 2024.
Amirhossein Ravari, Guangyu Jiang, Zuyuan Zhang, Mahdi Imani, Robert H Thomson, Aryn A Pyke,
Nathaniel D Bastian, and Tian Lan. Adversarial inverse learning of defense policies conditioned on human
factor models. In 2024 58th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, pages 188-195. IEEE,
2024.
Zuyuan Zhang, Vaneet Aggarwal, and Tian Lan. Lisfc-search: Lifelong search for network sfc optimization
under non-stationary drifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.14360, 2026d.
Sizhe Tang, Jiayu Chen, and Tian Lan. Malinzero: Efficient low-dimensional search for mastering complex
multi-agent planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06142, 2025.
Sizhe Tang, Rongqian Chen, and Tian Lan. Agent alpha: Tree search unifying generation, exploration and
evaluation for computer-use agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02995, 2026.
Yu Li, Sizhe Tang, Rongqian Chen, Fei Xu Yu, Guangyu Jiang, Mahdi Imani, Nathaniel D Bastian, and Tian
Lan. Acdzero: Graph-embedding-based tree search for mastering automated cyber defense. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.02196, 2026.
A
Algorithm
A.1
Using learned transformations in RL
Given a transition tuple (s, a, sвҖІ, r) collected from the environment, transition augmentation generates
(Лңs, Лңa, ЛңsвҖІ, Лңr) :=
 gОұ(s), hОұ(a), gОұ(sвҖІ), r

,
and inserts it into the replay buffer. Under exact value preservation, Лңr = r and the augmented
transition is distributed as a valid transition from (Лңs, Лңa). Under approximate value preservation, the
Algorithm 1 Value-preserving structure discovery and reinforcement learning with learned transfor-
mations
1: Initialize replay buffer D; models (ЛҶbПү, ЛҶОЈПү, ЛҶrПү); fields (XОё, YП•); RL parameters ПҲ
2: for iterations = 1, 2, . . . do
3:
Collect rollouts with policy ПҖПҲ; store (s, a, sвҖІ, r) into D
4:
Update (ЛҶbПү, ЛҶОЈПү, ЛҶrПү) on minibatches from D if unknown (and set ЛҶQПү = ЛҶОЈПү ЛҶОЈвҠӨ
Пү )
5:
Sample minibatch {(si, ai)} from D
6:
Compute residuals Rr, Rb, RQ via automatic differentiation
7:
Update (Оё, П•) by (stochastic) gradient steps on (26)
8:
Numerically integrate (27) for small Оұ to obtain (gОұ, hОұ)
9:
Use (gОұ, hОұ) for transition augmentation and/or transformation-consistency regularization;
update ПҲ
10: end for
augmented transition is a controlled perturbation whose effect is governed by the generator/reward
mismatch bounds in Section 4 and by the discrete-time analogue in Section B.
We also encourage the learned critic/value and policy to respect the discovered transformation. For a
value function VПҲ, we use the invariance penalty
Rinv(ПҲ) := EsвҲјПҒS, ОұвҲјОҪ
h VПҲ(s) вҲ’VПҲ(gОұ(s))
2i
,
where ОҪ is a distribution over small flow times, such as the uniform distribution on [вҲ’Оұ0, Оұ0]. For a
stochastic policy ПҖПҲ(В· | s), we use a policy-transport consistency penalty based on the pushforward
(hОұ)#ПҖПҲ(В· | s):
Rpol(ПҲ) := EsвҲјПҒS, ОұвҲјОҪ
h
KL
 ПҖПҲ(В· | gОұ(s)) вҲҘ(hОұ)#ПҖПҲ(В· | s)
i
.
In implementation, this term can be estimated by sampling a вҲјПҖПҲ(В· | s) and evaluating the log-
density of hОұ(a) under ПҖПҲ(В· | gОұ(s)). The RL parameters are updated with the base actor-critic loss
plus these consistency penalties:
min
ПҲ
LRL(ПҲ) + О»invRinv(ПҲ) + О»polRpol(ПҲ).
B
Theory Guarantees
We provide three layers of guarantees that mirror the pipeline in Section 5. First, we give standard
nonconvex optimization guarantees for stochastic structure discovery under smoothness and bounded
variance. Second, under realizability and consistent dynamics estimation, we state a consistency
result showing that the learned fields converge (in data measure) to a solution of the determining
equations, implying vanishing operator mismatch on the data support. Third, we bound numerical
errors introduced by finite-step ODE solvers when exponentiating the learned vector fields. Finally,
to give an end-to-end non-asymptotic statement free of actor-training nonconvexity, we include
a discrete-time tabular analogue showing how exact/approximate value-preserving augmentation
perturbs the Bellman fixed point.
B.1
Optimization Guarantees for Structure Discovery
Assumption B.1 (Smoothness and bounded variance for structure-discovery optimization). Let
Lsym(Оё, П•) denote the (penalized) objective in (26). Assume Lsym is L-smooth in (Оё, П•), i.e., its
gradient is L-Lipschitz. Assume the stochastic gradients used by the algorithm are unbiased and have
uniformly bounded second moments: EвҲҘgt вҲ’вҲҮLsym(Оёt, П•t)вҲҘ2
2 вүӨПғ2.
Theorem B.2 (Convergence of stochastic structure discovery to a stationary point). Under Assump-
tion B.1, running SGD with constant stepsize О· вүӨ1/L yields
T
T вҲ’1
X
t=0
E

вҲҘвҲҮLsym(Оёt, П•t)вҲҘ2

вүӨ2
 Lsym(Оё0, П•0) вҲ’Linf

О·T
+ О·LПғ2,
(28)
where Linf is a lower bound of Lsym. With appropriately diminishing stepsizes, one obtains the
standard rate min0вүӨtвүӨT вҲ’1 EвҲҘвҲҮLsym(Оёt, П•t)вҲҘ2
2 = O(1/
вҲҡ
T).
This result does not claim global recovery of the true symmetry fields in general (the problem is
nonconvex), but it ensures that the optimization procedure reaches approximate stationary points at
the usual SGD rates. Consistency requires additional realizability assumptions, addressed next.
B.2
Consistency under Realizability
Assumption B.3 (Realizability and consistent dynamics estimation). Assume there exist parameters
ПүвӢҶ, ОёвӢҶ, П•вӢҶsuch that ЛҶbПүвӢҶ= b, ЛҶQПүвӢҶ= Q, and ЛҶrПүвӢҶ= r on the support of ПҒ, and (XОёвӢҶ, YП•вӢҶ) satisfies the
determining equations (12), (13), and (14) on the support of ПҒ. Assume the estimators (ЛҶbПү, ЛҶQПү, ЛҶrПү)
are consistent as data grows, and the structure-discovery objective (26) can be optimized to its global
minimum.
Theorem B.4 (Consistency of learned infinitesimal generators (on data support)). Under Assump-
tion B.3, as the dataset size tends to infinity and the optimization error tends to zero, the learned
generators (XОё, YП•) converge in ПҒ-mean to a solution of the determining equations (12)-(14). In
particular, the induced operator mismatch in Definition 4.1 satisfies ОөL вҶ’0 and Оөr вҶ’0 on the
support of ПҒ.
Even under realizability, infinitesimal generators are typically identifiable only up to choices of basis
within the underlying transformation algebra. The normalization term in (26) fixes the overall scale
of XОё but does not preclude equivalent generators related by linear combinations related by linear
combinations when multiple transformation directions are present.
B.3
Numerical Flow Approximation
Assumption B.5 (Numerical flow integration). Assume XОё and YП• are Lipschitz on compact sets
KS вҠҶS and KA вҠҶA that contain the states/actions encountered by the algorithm. Let ЛҶgОұ and ЛҶhОұ be
computed by an order-p one-step ODE solver with step size h for Оұ in a bounded interval.
Theorem B.6 (Flow approximation error). Under Assumption B.5, for Оұ in a bounded interval, the
numerical flows satisfy
sup
sвҲҲKS
вҲҘЛҶgОұ(s) вҲ’gОұ(s)вҲҘ2 вүӨCghp,
sup
aвҲҲKA
вҲҘЛҶhОұ(a) вҲ’hОұ(a)вҲҘ2 вүӨChhp,
(29)
where Cg and Ch depend on Lipschitz constants of the fields on KS, KA and on the solver stability
region.
B.4
A Discrete-Time Analogue: Value-Preserving Augmented Bellman Backups
The continuous-time theory above explains why (approximate) generator equivariance leads to
(approximate) value invariance. To provide a fully non-asymptotic end-to-end convergence statement
that avoids nonconvex actor training, we additionally state a discrete-time tabular analogue in which
value iteration is a contraction and fixed-point perturbations can be bounded explicitly.
Let T be the optimal Bellman operator in a discounted discrete-time MDP:
(TV )(s) = max
aвҲҲA

r(s, a) + Оі
Z
V (sвҖІ) P(dsвҖІ | s, a)

.
(30)
T is a Оі-contraction in вҲҘВ· вҲҘвҲһ.
Theorem B.7 (Exact value-preserving augmentation preserves the Bellman operator). Assume
there exists a transformation pair (g, h) forming an exact value-preserving correspondence for
the discrete-time MDP, namely r(g(s), h(a)) = r(s, a) and P(В· | g(s), h(a)) = g#P(В· | s, a) for
all (s, a). Then the Bellman backup is invariant under augmentation by (g, h) in expectation, so
tabular value iteration with exact value-preserving augmentation converges to V вӢҶat the usual rate
вҲҘVk вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨОіkвҲҘV0 вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ.
Theorem B.8 (Approximate value-preserving augmentation yields a bounded fixed-point perturba-
tion). Define total variation as dTV(Вө, ОҪ) := supвҲҘfвҲҘвҲһвүӨ1
 R
f d(Вө вҲ’ОҪ)
. Assume the augmentation
is (ОөP , Оөr) approximate in the discrete-time sense:
sup
s,a
r(g(s), h(a)) вҲ’r(s, a)
 вүӨОөr,
sup
s,a dTV
 P(В· | g(s), h(a)), g#P(В· | s, a)

вүӨОөP .
(31)
Let ЛңT be the Bellman operator induced by the approximately augmented model. Then for any bounded
V ,
вҲҘ( ЛңTV ) вҲ’(TV )вҲҘвҲһвүӨОөr + Оі ОөP вҲҘV вҲҘвҲһ,
(32)
and ЛңT remains a Оі-contraction. Let ЛңV вӢҶbe the fixed point of ЛңT. Then the fixed-point error satisfies
вҲҘЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨ
1 вҲ’Оі (Оөr + Оі ОөP вҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ) .
(33)
B.5
HJB well-posedness used in the main text
Assumption B.9 (HJB well-posedness). Assume: (i) A is a compact metric space and r, b, ОЈ are
continuous in (s, a) and Lipschitz in s uniformly over a; moreover |r| вүӨRmax and b, ОЈ are bounded.
(ii) The diffusion matrix Q(s, a) = ОЈ(s, a)ОЈ(s, a)вҠӨis uniformly elliptic: there exists О» > 0 such
that ОҫвҠӨQ(s, a)Оҫ вүҘО»вҲҘОҫвҲҘ2 for all (s, a) and Оҫ вҲҲRd. (iii) Either S is bounded with an appropriate
state-constraint or boundary condition, or S = Rd with a growth/boundedness condition ensuring
that V вӢҶis well defined and bounded. (iv) A comparison principle holds for bounded viscosity sub-
and supersolutions of (7).
C
Running Example: Planar Rotation as a Special Case
Let ЛҶe3 =
"0
вҲ’1
1
0
0
#
,
gОё = exp(ОёЛҶe3) вҲҲSO(3), and let the induced action on vectors v вҲҲR3
be ПҒ(gОё)v = Rz(Оё)v,
Rz(Оё) =
"cos Оё
вҲ’sin Оё
sin Оё
cos Оё
0
1
#
,
Оё вҲҲ(вҲ’ПҖ, ПҖ].
Consider a state s = (x, xd, Оҫ), where x вҲҲR3 is the current position, xd вҲҲR3 is a goal/location
descriptor, and Оҫ collects scalar quantities left invariant by a transformation family.
Let the
action be a control vector a = F
вҲҲR3.
For the planar-orbiting case, define gОё В· s :=
 Rz(Оё)x, Rz(Оё)xd, Оҫ

,
hОё В· a := Rz(Оё)a. If the controlled dynamics and reward depend
only on relative geometry and transformation-invariant control quantities, then the generator-level
value-preserving condition and reward compatibility hold: LaUgОё = UgОёLhОё(a),
r(gОёВ·s, hОёВ·a) =
r(s, a). Hence the optimal policy can be transported consistently along the orbit, ПҖвӢҶ(gОёВ·s) вүҲhОёВ·ПҖвӢҶ(s).
The same perspective extends beyond globally symmetric coordinates. For a UAV executing a figure-
eight maneuver, one can align repeated phase-matched relative configurations across the two lobes
of the trajectory. These matched configurations need not form a global coordinate symmetry, but
they can still induce approximate value-preserving correspondences when the local control semantics,
geometry, and reward-to-go remain close. This illustrates why the target of our method is broader
value-preserving structure rather than symmetry alone.
D
Additional Experimental Details and Full Results
This appendix provides full environment specifications, hyperparameters, and complete plots for
all benchmark variants. We also include ablations and additional diagnostics linking generator
discovery to operator mismatch and value invariance. Unless noted otherwise, all environments are
implemented in gymnasium style with continuous observation and action spaces, and at submission
time, the anonymized supplementary material contains key implementation code for VPSD-RL,
configuration templates. The complete cleaned repository and raw logs will be released upon
acceptance.
рқ‘Ҙ!
рқҗ№
рқ‘Ҷ
рқ‘ҺвҲ—
рқңӢвҲ—(рқ‘ )
рқңӢвҲ—(рқ‘ Мғ)
рқ‘Ҷ*
рқ‘Ҙ!
рқҗ№
рқ‘Ҷ
рқ‘ҺвҲ—
рқңӢвҲ—(рқ‘ )
рқңӢвҲ—(рқ‘ Мғ)
рқ‘Ҷ* = рқ‘”#рқ‘Ҷ
рқ‘Һ-вҲ—= рқ‘”#рқ‘ҺвҲ—
рқ‘”#
рқ‘”#
рқ‘”#рқҗ№
?
Standard RL / no discovered structure
True symmetry and learned symmetry
рқңҢрқ‘”# = рқ‘…$ рқңғ=
cos рқңғ
вҲ’sin рқңғ
sin рқңғ
cos рқңғ
0
1
Rotational Symmetry:
True Symmetry:
рқ‘”# = рқ‘’рқ‘Ҙрқ‘қрқңғрқ‘’МӮ% , рқ‘’МӮ% =
вҲ’1
1
0
0
рқ‘”># = рқ‘’рқ‘Ҙрқ‘қрқңғрқҗҙ@ , рқҗҙ@ =
вҲ’1
1
0
0
Learned Symmetry:
Top: optimization curve up to step 400. Bottom: рқ‘’МӮ% and learned matrices at selected stages.
Figure 3: Running planar-rotation example illustrating the role of discovered value-preserving
structure in continuous control. Left: a standard policy learner has no explicit mechanism tying
a visited state s to its transformed counterpart Лңs = gОёs. Middle: in the rotational special case,
the ground-truth transformation is generated by gОё = exp(ОёЛҶe3), with induced action ПҒ(gОё)v =
Rz(Оё)v; our method instead learns an infinitesimal generator ЛҶA and constructs the finite transform
ЛҶgОё = exp(Оё ЛҶA). Right: numerical diagnostics show that, as optimization proceeds, the learned
generator approaches the ground-truth rotational generator and the induced finite transforms become
increasingly consistent with true orbit transport, supporting the value-preserving relation ПҖвӢҶ(gОёs) вүҲ
hОёПҖвӢҶ(s).
D.1
Stage I: Full synthetic environments and diagnostics
Common state/action conventions.
All three synthetic environments use the same state and action
parameterization. The state is s = (x, y, vx, vy) вҲҲR4 (position and velocity in the plane), and the
action is a bounded acceleration command a = (ax, ay) вҲҲ[вҲ’1, 1]2. Let p = (x, y) and v = (vx, vy).
All stochasticity enters through the velocity channels only.
Each environment is an Euler-Maruyama discretization of a controlled diffusion of the form
dpt = vt dt,
dvt = f(pt, vt, at) dt + Пғ dWt,
(34)
where Wt is a 2D standard Wiener process and Пғ > 0 is isotropic. In discrete time with step size вҲҶt
we use the semi-implicit update
vk+1 = vk + вҲҶt f(pk, vk, ak) + Пғ
вҲҡ
вҲҶt Оҫk,
pk+1 = pk + вҲҶt vk+1,
(35)
with Оҫk вҲјN(0, I2) i.i.d.
Rot2D-Point (Rot2DPointEnv).
This is the baseline SO(2)-invariant controlled diffusion with
linear damping:
f(p, v, a) = a вҲ’О»v,
(36)
where О» > 0 is the damping coefficient. The instantaneous reward is SO(2)-invariant:
r(s, a) = вҲ’вҲҘpвҲҘ2
2 вҲ’0.1 вҲҘvвҲҘ2
2.
(37)
The induced continuous symmetry action is the usual planar rotation: for any R вҲҲSO(2),
gR(p, v, a) = (Rp, Rv, Ra),
(38)
under which both the drift (36) and reward (37) are invariant. The environment uses defaults
вҲҶt = 0.05, Пғ = 0.02, О» = 0.1, horizon T = 200 steps (see code listing).
Ref2D-DoubleWell (Ref2DDoubleWellEnv).
This environment uses a double-well potential with
reflection symmetry x 7вҶ’вҲ’x when Оҙ = 0. Define the base potential
U0(x, y) = (x2 вҲ’1)2 + y2,
(39)
and the dynamics potential (used in the drift) with a tunable symmetry-breaking term
Udyn(x, y) = U0(x, y) + Оҙx.
(40)
The drift is
f(p, v, a) = вҲ’вҲҮUdyn(p) вҲ’О»v + a,
(41)
Table 2: Synthetic environment default parameters in our implementation.
Env
вҲҶt
Пғ
О»
Horizon
Extra
Notes
Rot2D-Point
0.05
0.02
0.1
-
SO(2) invariant
Ref2D-DoubleWell
0.05
0.02
0.1
Оҙ
reflection exact if Оҙ = 0
PostConstraint-Rot2D
0.05
0.02
0.1
[rmin, rmax]
projection + tangential velocity
where вҲҮUdyn(x, y) =
 4x(x2 вҲ’1) + Оҙ, 2y

. The reward is kept independent of Оҙ (matching the
implementation):
r(s, a) = вҲ’U0(x, y) вҲ’0.1 вҲҘvвҲҘ2
2.
(42)
When Оҙ = 0, the environment is invariant under the reflection action
g(p, v, a) = ((вҲ’x, y), (вҲ’vx, vy), (вҲ’ax, ay)).
(43)
When Оҙ Мё= 0, the symmetry is only approximate; we use this setting to stress-test discovery under
controlled mismatch. The implementation additionally applies mild clipping to position/velocity
to avoid numerical blow-ups (see code listing). Defaults: вҲҶt = 0.05, Пғ = 0.02, О» = 0.1, horizon
T = 200 steps.
PostConstraint-Rot2D (PostConstraintRot2DEnv).
This environment starts from the Rot2D
drift (36) and then enforces a feasibility constraint on position:
вҲҘpвҲҘ2 вҲҲ[rmin, rmax].
(44)
After the unconstrained update (35), we project the position to the annulus:
pk+1 вҶҗО A(pk+1),
A = {p : rmin вүӨвҲҘpвҲҘ2 вүӨrmax},
(45)
and when a projection occurs we remove the radial velocity component to maintain boundary
consistency:
vk+1 вҶҗvk+1 вҲ’u вҹЁvk+1, uвҹ©,
u =
pk+1
вҲҘpk+1вҲҘ2
.
(46)
The reward matches Rot2D-Point:
r(s, a) = вҲ’вҲҘpвҲҘ2
2 вҲ’0.1 вҲҘvвҲҘ2
2.
(47)
This environment preserves rotational symmetry in the interior but introduces non-smooth geometry
and boundary effects, making it a convenient testbed for constrained flows and retraction/projection
handling in the discovered transformations. Defaults: вҲҶt = 0.05, Пғ = 0.02, О» = 0.1, rmin = 0.5,
rmax = 2.0, horizon T = 200 steps. The step function also logs whether projection occurred
(info["projected"]).
Summary of synthetic parameters.
Table 2 lists the default parameters used by our reference
implementation (exact values in the released config files).
Symmetry discovery setup.
For Stage I, we collect transition tuples (s, a, r, sвҖІ) by rolling out a
behavior policy (Appendix D.3). The discovery module fits a generator field (or parameterization
thereof) by minimizing determining-equation residuals. We report: (i) residual statistics EвҲҘRbвҲҘ2
2,
EвҲҘRQвҲҘ2
F , E|Rr|2; (ii) generator alignment with ground truth (cosine similarity after normalization);
and (iii) value non-invariance Es,Оұ|V (s) вҲ’V (gОұ(s))| vs. |Оұ|.
Additional plots.
D.2
Stage II: SymNav-15 benchmark variants
State, action, and observation.
SymNavEnv is a 2D navigation environment with obstacles and
smooth wind disturbances. The latent physical state is again s = (x, y, vx, vy) вҲҲR4 and the action is
a = (ax, ay) вҲҲ[вҲ’1, 1]2. The observation augments state with goal-relative features and lidar rays:
o =

x, y, vx, vy, (gx вҲ’x), (gy вҲ’y), d1, . . . , d8

вҲҲR14,
(48)
where di вҲҲ[0, 1] is the normalized distance-to-collision along ray i (8 rays uniformly spaced over
[0, 2ПҖ)), computed against both circular obstacles and the world boundary (a disk).
0
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
loss_inv
Invariance violation proxy (training batch-averaged)
PostConstraint-Rot2D-v0
Ref2D-DoubleWell-v0
Rot2D-Point-v0
(a)
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
loss_sym
Structure regularization (symmetry consistency)
PostConstraint-Rot2D-v0
Ref2D-DoubleWell-v0
Rot2D-Point-v0
(b)
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
loss_eq
Determining-equation residual loss
PostConstraint-Rot2D-v0
Ref2D-DoubleWell-v0
Rot2D-Point-v0
(c)
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
4
2
0
2
sym/(
q +
)
Regularizer-to-RL loss ratio
PostConstraint-Rot2D-v0
Ref2D-DoubleWell-v0
Rot2D-Point-v0
(d)
Figure 4: Fig. 4a Invariance violation proxy over training (batch-averaged Linv). Fig. 4b Sym-
metry/consistency regularization term over training (batch-averaged Lsym). Fig. 4c Determining-
equation residual term used during Stage I (batch-averaged Leq). Fig. 4d Regularizer-to-RL loss ratio
across tasks, illustrating that regularization does not dominate optimization.
Dynamics.
The environment implements the same semi-implicit update (35) with a variant-
dependent wind field:
f(p, v, a) = a + w(p) вҲ’О»v,
(49)
where О» > 0 is damping and w(p) is a smooth wind:
w(x, y) = k
 sin(0.5 y), cos(0.5 x)

,
k = 0.15
 (variant mod 5) + 1

.
(50)
Noise is isotropic in the velocity channels, as in (34). After each step, position is clamped to remain
inside the world disk of radius Rworld by radial rescaling.
Map generation (variants).
Each variant is identified by an integer variant вҲҲ{1, . . . , 15}. The
goal is placed on a circle of radius rg with angle determined by the variant index:
g = rg(cos Оё, sin Оё),
Оё = 2ПҖ (variant mod 15)
,
rg = 3.5.
(51)
Obstacles are 6 circles with centers and radii deterministically generated from variant (matching the
implementation): for k вҲҲ{0, . . . , 5},
Оёk = 2ПҖk
+ 0.15(variant mod 5),
ПҒk = 1.2 + 0.2
 (variant + k) mod 3

,
(52)
ck = ПҒk(cos Оёk, sin Оёk),
rk = 0.35 + 0.05
 (variant + 2k) mod 4

.
(53)
This generator yields 15 related maps with shared observation/action interfaces but diverse local
geometry.
Reward, termination, and diagnostics.
Let d(p, g) = вҲҘp вҲ’gвҲҘ2 be the goal distance. The step
reward is dense shaping minus collision penalty plus a terminal success bonus:
r = вҲ’d(p, g) вҲ’2 В· I{collision} + 10 В· I{d(p, g) < Оө},
Оө = 0.3.
(54)
Episodes terminate on success (d(p, g) < Оө) and truncate at horizon T = 400. The environment
returns diagnostic flags info["success"], info["collided"], and info["dist"].
Approximate transformations.
While the exact rotational symmetry is broken by variant-specific
obstacles, goal placement, and wind scaling, the construction is designed to admit approximate
continuous transformations: rotating (p, v, a) and rotating the map/goal yields near-matching local
dynamics in many regions, with mismatch localized near obstacles and due to non-invariant wind
terms. This is precisely the regime where operator mismatch bounds and value non-invariance
diagnostics are most informative.
Variant list and full learning curves.
We evaluate variants {V1, . . . , V15} corresponding to
variant=1..15. Full learning curves for all variants and all methods are in Fig. 5. (We optionally
include a compact table of map/goal/wind parameters per variant in the released appendix PDF.)
Training details.
All methods use the same observation preprocessing, episode truncation, and
evaluation protocol. Per-method hyperparameters (optimizer, learning rate, batch size, replay set-
tings for off-policy methods, etc.) and the exact seed list are provided in Appendix D.3 and the
accompanying configuration files.
0
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v1
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(a) SymNav-V1
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v2
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(b) SymNav-V2
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v3
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(c) SymNav-V3
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v4
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(d) SymNav-V4
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v5
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(e) SymNav-V5
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v6
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(f) SymNav-V6
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v7
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(g) SymNav-V7
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v8
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(h) SymNav-V8
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v9
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(i) SymNav-V9
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v10
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(j) SymNav-V10
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v11
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(k) SymNav-V11
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v12
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(l) SymNav-V12
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v13
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(m) SymNav-V13
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v14
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(n) SymNav-V14
60K
120K
180K
240K
300K
Env steps
1750
1250
750
250
Eval return
SymNav-v15
VPSD-RL
SAC
TD3
PPO
DDPG
A2C
DynRand
RARL
EPOPT
(o) SymNav-V15
Figure 5: Full learning curves on all SymNav-15 variants for all compared methods.
D.3
Implementation details: model fitting and flow integration
Data collection for discovery.
Discovery operates on transition tuples (s, a, r, sвҖІ) collected online
during RL training. For on-policy methods, we use recent rollouts; for off-policy methods, we sample
from the replay buffer. To stabilize the determining-residual optimization, we (i) balance minibatches
across the current state distribution, and (ii) normalize state components (position/velocity scales)
using running statistics.
Dynamics and reward modeling.
For synthetic environments, ground-truth drift/diffusion/reward
are known analytically via Eqs. (36)-(47), (41)-(42), and are used to compute ground-truth generators
Table 3: Aggregate results on SymNav-V1. Numbers are mean Вұ std over seeds, averaged across all
variants. AUC is computed up to a fixed step budget. Wall-clock reports seconds per 105 environment
steps.
Method
Avg. normalized return вҶ‘
AUC вҶ‘
Wall-clock (sec / 105 steps) вҶ“
A2C
-1876.58Вұ321.57
-1952.71Вұ217.57
175Вұ1
DDPG
-106.97Вұ2.36
-206.47Вұ39.70
540Вұ7
PPO
-270.43Вұ136.65
-424.68Вұ140.79
217Вұ35
SAC
-106.60Вұ1.97
-233.54Вұ43.70
410Вұ12
TD3
-104.58Вұ0.41
-172.08Вұ25.35
754Вұ10
DynRand
-115.54Вұ7.25
-181.49Вұ18.78
581Вұ12
RARL
-114.53Вұ6.48
-155.27Вұ17.23
753Вұ12
EPOpt
-197.45Вұ67.57
-271.25Вұ78.60
485Вұ27
VPSD-RL (Aug+Reg)
-124.48Вұ12.65
-145.78Вұ24.65
752Вұ20
and diagnostic alignment. For complex environments (SymNav and MuJoCo), the discovery module
fits local surrogate models for drift b(s, a) and reward r(s, a) by regression on one-step transitions:
bb(s, a) вүҲsвҖІ вҲ’s
вҲҶt ,
br(s, a) вүҲr.
If a diffusion model is used, we parameterize Q(s, a) through a PSD form (e.g., diagonal or Cholesky
factor) to ensure positive semidefiniteness. All exact architectural choices and optimizer settings are
provided in the config files.
Flow integration and constraint handling.
Given a learned generator X(В·) (and Y (В·) when
needed), we produce finite transformations by integrating the ODE
d
dОұz(Оұ) = X(z(Оұ)),
z(0) = z0,
(or its coupled version in the method section), using a fixed-step explicit solver (RK4 by default). We
integrate over a symmetric range Оұ вҲҲ[вҲ’Оұmax, Оұmax] with step size h. For constrained environments
(PostConstraint-Rot2D), we apply the same projection/retraction policy as the environment: position
is projected to the feasible annulus and the radial velocity component is removed when projection
occurs (Eqs. (45)-(46)). We reject transformations that cause numerical instability (NaNs/Infs) and
fall back to identity augmentation in that case.
E
Limitations and broader impact.
VPSD-RL relies on differentiable surrogate drift, diffusion, and reward estimates, as well as locally
valid Lie-group flows. Its performance may degrade when the learned generator is poorly identified,
when the dynamics are strongly discontinuous, or when the value-preserving relation holds only on
a narrow data support. The current evaluation is limited to controlled simulation benchmarks, so
deployment in safety-critical robotic or physical systems requires additional validation, constraint
checking, and monitoring under distribution shift. The expected positive impact is improved data
efficiency and robustness in continuous-control RL; a possible negative impact is over-trusting learned
transformations in high-stakes autonomous systems when the approximate-invariance assumptions
fail.
F
Proof
F.1
Proof of Theorem 2.1
Proof. Fix ОІ > 0 and consider the controlled diffusion dst = b(st, at) dt + ОЈ(st, at) dWt with at вҲҲ
A admissible. For any Markov policy ПҖ, the discounted value is V ПҖ(s) = EПҖR вҲһ
eвҲ’ОІtr(st, at) dt

and V вӢҶ(s) = supПҖ V ПҖ(s). Since |r| вүӨRmax, for every ПҖ and every s,
|V ПҖ(s)| вүӨEПҖ
Z вҲһ
eвҲ’ОІt|r(st, at)| dt

вүӨ
Z вҲһ
eвҲ’ОІtRmax dt = Rmax
ОІ
,
hence V вӢҶis well-defined and bounded.
Under Assumption B.9(i)-(iii), the SDE is well-posed for admissible controls and the strong Markov
property together with control concatenation yields the discounted dynamic programming principle:
for any bounded stopping time П„,
V вӢҶ(s) = sup
ПҖ EПҖhZ П„
eвҲ’ОІtr(st, at) dt + eвҲ’ОІП„V вӢҶ(sП„)
 s0 = s
i
.
(55)
We now verify that V вӢҶis a bounded viscosity solution of the HJB equation ОІV = (HV ), where for
ПҶ вҲҲC2(S),
(LaПҶ)(s) := b(s, a) В· вҲҮПҶ(s) + 1
2 tr
 Q(s, a)вҲҮ2ПҶ(s)

,
(HПҶ)(s) := sup
aвҲҲA
{r(s, a) + (LaПҶ)(s)}.
Let ПҶ вҲҲC2(S) and suppose V вӢҶвҲ’ПҶ attains a local maximum at s0 with V вӢҶ(s0) = ПҶ(s0). Then
there exists ПҒ > 0 such that V вӢҶ(s) вүӨПҶ(s) for all s вҲҲBПҒ(s0). Let П„ПҒ := inf{t вүҘ0 : st /вҲҲBПҒ(s0)}
and fix t > 0; set П„ := t вҲ§П„ПҒ. By (55) and the definition of supremum, for any Оө > 0 there exists an
admissible policy ПҖОө such that
V вӢҶ(s0) вүӨEПҖОөZ П„
eвҲ’ОІur(su, au) du + eвҲ’ОІП„V вӢҶ(sП„)

+ Оөt.
Since sП„ вҲҲBПҒ(s0), we have V вӢҶ(sП„) вүӨПҶ(sП„), hence using V вӢҶ(s0) = ПҶ(s0),
0 вүӨEПҖОөZ П„
eвҲ’ОІur(su, au) du + eвҲ’ОІП„ПҶ(sП„) вҲ’ПҶ(s0)

+ Оөt.
(56)
Apply ItГҙвҖҷs formula to eвҲ’ОІuПҶ(su) under ПҖОө. Using dsu = b(su, au) du + ОЈ(su, au) dWu and
dsudsвҠӨ
u = Q(su, au) du, we obtain
dПҶ(su) = вҲҮПҶ(su) В· b(su, au) du + вҲҮПҶ(su) В· ОЈ(su, au) dWu + 1
2 tr
 Q(su, au)вҲҮ2ПҶ(su)

du,
and therefore
d
 eвҲ’ОІuПҶ(su)

= eвҲ’ОІu (LauПҶ)(su) вҲ’ОІПҶ(su)

du + eвҲ’ОІuвҲҮПҶ(su) В· ОЈ(su, au) dWu.
Integrating from 0 to П„ gives the identity
eвҲ’ОІП„ПҶ(sП„) вҲ’ПҶ(s0) =
Z П„
eвҲ’ОІu (LauПҶ)(su) вҲ’ОІПҶ(su)

du +
Z П„
eвҲ’ОІuвҲҮПҶ(su) В· ОЈ(su, au) dWu.
The stochastic integral is a martingale with zero expectation (bounded coefficients and П„ вүӨt < вҲһ),
hence
EПҖОө
eвҲ’ОІП„ПҶ(sП„) вҲ’ПҶ(s0)

= EПҖОөZ П„
eвҲ’ОІu (LauПҶ)(su) вҲ’ОІПҶ(su)

du

.
Substituting into (56) yields
0 вүӨEПҖОөZ П„
eвҲ’ОІu
r(su, au) + (LauПҶ)(su) вҲ’ОІПҶ(su)

du

+ Оөt.
Define ОЁ(s) := supaвҲҲA{r(s, a) + (LaПҶ)(s) вҲ’ОІПҶ(s)} = (HПҶ)(s) вҲ’ОІПҶ(s). Since r(su, au) +
(LauПҶ)(su) вҲ’ОІПҶ(su) вүӨОЁ(su),
0 вүӨEПҖОөZ П„
eвҲ’ОІuОЁ(su) du

+ Оөt.
Dividing by t > 0 gives
0 вүӨ1
t EПҖОөZ П„
eвҲ’ОІuОЁ(su) du

+ Оө.
We claim 1
t EПҖОөR П„
0 eвҲ’ОІuОЁ(su) du

вҶ’ОЁ(s0) as t вҶ“0. Indeed, since П„ вүӨt and ОЁ is bounded on
BПҒ(s0), using |eвҲ’ОІu вҲ’1| вүӨОІu we have
t E
Z П„
(eвҲ’ОІu вҲ’1)ОЁ(su) du
 вүӨ1
t E
Z П„
ОІu вҲҘОЁвҲҘвҲһdu

вүӨОІвҲҘОЁвҲҘвҲһ
t вҶ’0.
Moreover, ОЁ is uniformly continuous on BПҒ(s0), so for its modulus of continuity Пү(В·), the term
t E
R П„
0 |ОЁ(su) вҲ’ОЁ(s0)| du

vanishes as t вҶ“0 because sup0вүӨuвүӨt вҲҘsu вҲ’s0вҲҘвҶ’0 in probability
under bounded coefficients (drift is O(t) and the martingale part is O(
вҲҡ
t) by BDG), and П„ = t вҲ§П„ПҒ
satisfies E[П„]/t вҶ’1. Consequently,
lim
tвҶ“0
t EПҖОөZ П„
eвҲ’ОІuОЁ(su) du

= ОЁ(s0).
Letting t вҶ“0 yields 0 вүӨОЁ(s0) + Оө, and then Оө вҶ“0 gives ОЁ(s0) вүҘ0, i.e. ОІПҶ(s0) вүӨ(HПҶ)(s0). This
proves that V вӢҶis a viscosity subsolution.
Now suppose V вӢҶвҲ’ПҶ attains a local minimum at s0 with V вӢҶ(s0) = ПҶ(s0). Then for some ПҒ > 0,
V вӢҶвүҘПҶ on BПҒ(s0), and with П„ = tвҲ§П„ПҒ we have, for any fixed a вҲҲA, by (55) (since supПҖ dominates
the constant control au вүЎa),
V вӢҶ(s0) вүҘE
Z П„
eвҲ’ОІur(su, a) du + eвҲ’ОІП„V вӢҶ(sП„)

вүҘE
Z П„
eвҲ’ОІur(su, a) du + eвҲ’ОІП„ПҶ(sП„)

.
Using V вӢҶ(s0) = ПҶ(s0) and the same ItГҙ identity as above (with generator La) gives
0 вүҘE
Z П„
eвҲ’ОІu
r(su, a) + (LaПҶ)(su) вҲ’ОІПҶ(su)

du

.
Divide by t and let t вҶ“0 to obtain 0 вүҘr(s0, a) + (LaПҶ)(s0) вҲ’ОІПҶ(s0) for every a вҲҲA. Taking the
supremum over a yields ОІПҶ(s0) вүҘ(HПҶ)(s0), hence V вӢҶis a viscosity supersolution. Therefore V вӢҶ
is a bounded viscosity solution of ОІV = HV , establishing existence of a bounded viscosity solution.
Uniqueness among bounded viscosity solutions follows directly from the comparison principle in
Assumption B.9(iv): if u is a bounded viscosity subsolution and v a bounded viscosity supersolution,
then u вүӨv. In particular, if V is any bounded viscosity solution, then V is both a subsolution and a
supersolution, so V вүӨV вӢҶand V вӢҶвүӨV , implying V вүЎV вӢҶ.
F.2
Proof of Lemma 3.2
Proof. We fix a вҲҲA and write Лңa := hП‘(a), Tt := P a
t , ЛңTt := P Лңa
t , A := La, ЛңA := LЛңa, and U := UgП‘.
We will use two standard C0-semigroup facts, stated and proved here for completeness.
Lemma F.1. Let (St)tвүҘ0 be a strongly continuous semigroup on a Banach space X with generator
G. For every x вҲҲDom(G), the map t 7вҶ’Stx is norm-differentiable and satisfies d
dtStx = GStx =
StGx for all t вүҘ0. Moreover, if w : [0, вҲһ) вҶ’X is norm-differentiable, w(t) вҲҲDom(G) for all t,
and wвҖІ(t) = Gw(t) with w(0) = x вҲҲDom(G), then necessarily w(t) = Stx for all t вүҘ0.
Proof. Fix x вҲҲDom(G). By definition of G, the limit Gx = limhвҶ“0
ShxвҲ’x
h
exists in X. For t вүҘ0
and h > 0, use the semigroup property to compute
St+hx вҲ’Stx
h
= St(Shx вҲ’x)
h
= St
Shx вҲ’x
h

.
Since St is bounded for fixed t, letting h вҶ“0 yields the right-derivative limhвҶ“0
St+hxвҲ’Stx
h
= StGx.
For 0 < h < t, similarly
Stx вҲ’StвҲ’hx
h
= StвҲ’h(Shx вҲ’x)
h
= StвҲ’h
Shx вҲ’x
h

,
and letting h вҶ“0 gives the left-derivative equal to StGx by strong continuity of StвҲ’h at t. Thus
t 7вҶ’Stx is norm-differentiable and d
dtStx = StGx. To identify GStx, note that for h > 0,
Sh(Stx) вҲ’Stx
h
= St(Shx вҲ’x)
h
= St
Shx вҲ’x
h

вҶ’StGx
(h вҶ“0),
so Stx вҲҲDom(G) and GStx = StGx, hence also d
dtStx = GStx.
For uniqueness, let w satisfy the stated assumptions and fix t > 0. Define П•(s) := StвҲ’sw(s) for
s вҲҲ[0, t]. Using the already proved identity d
dsStвҲ’sy = вҲ’GStвҲ’sy for y вҲҲDom(G) and the product
rule in X, we compute
П•вҖІ(s) = вҲ’GStвҲ’sw(s) + StвҲ’swвҖІ(s) = вҲ’GStвҲ’sw(s) + StвҲ’sGw(s) = 0,
so П• is constant and П•(t) = П•(0) gives w(t) = Stw(0) = Stx. Since t was arbitrary, w(t) = Stx
for all t вүҘ0.
Lemma F.2. If (St)tвүҘ0 is a strongly continuous semigroup on a Banach space X with generator G,
then Dom(G) is dense in X.
Proof. Let О» > 0 and define the bounded operator (the Yosida approximation)
GО»x := О»
Z вҲһ
eвҲ’О»tStx dt вҲ’x,
x вҲҲX,
where the Bochner integral exists because t 7вҶ’Stx is continuous and вҲҘStвҲҘis locally bounded.
Define xО» := О»
R вҲһ
eвҲ’О»tStx dt. Then xО» вҶ’x in X as О» вҶ’вҲһby strong continuity at 0 (an
Abel-type limit). Moreover, one checks directly from the generator definition that xО» вҲҲDom(G)
and GxО» = О»(xО» вҲ’x) (equivalently xО» вҲҲRan(О»I вҲ’G) вҠӮDom(G)). Hence every x вҲҲX is a
norm-limit of elements in Dom(G), proving density.
We now prove the two directions of Lemma 3.2.
Assume first the generator intertwining holds on the common generator core:
AUf = U ЛңAf,
вҲҖf вҲҲDom( ЛңA).
Fix f вҲҲDom( ЛңA) and define u(t) := U ЛңTtf for t вүҘ0. By Lemma F.1 applied to ( ЛңTt) and ЛңA, we have
ЛңTtf вҲҲDom( ЛңA) and
d
dt
ЛңTtf = ЛңA ЛңTtf.
Since U is bounded linear,
uвҖІ(t) = U ЛңA ЛңTtf.
Because AU = U ЛңA on Dom( ЛңA), we have
uвҖІ(t) = AU ЛңTtf = Au(t),
u(0) = Uf.
Define v(t) := TtUf. By Lemma F.1 applied to (Tt) and A, vвҖІ(t) = Av(t) and v(0) = Uf. Hence
u(t) = v(t), namely
U ЛңTtf = TtUf,
вҲҖt вүҘ0, вҲҖf вҲҲDom( ЛңA).
By density of Dom( ЛңA) and boundedness of U, Tt, ЛңTt, this extends to all f вҲҲF:
TtU = U ЛңTt.
Equivalently,
P a
t UgП‘ = UgП‘P hП‘(a)
t
.
Conversely, assume the semigroup intertwining holds:
TtU = U ЛңTt,
t вүҘ0.
For every f вҲҲDom( ЛңA),
AUf = lim
tвҶ“0
TtUf вҲ’Uf
t
= lim
tвҶ“0
U ЛңTtf вҲ’Uf
t
= U ЛңAf.
Therefore AU = U ЛңA, equivalently
LaUgП‘ = UgП‘LhП‘(a),
which is Eq. (8) on the generator domain.
F.3
Proof of Theorem 3.3
Proof. Fix (s, a) вҲҲS Г— A and abbreviate gПө := gП‘Пө, hПө := hП‘Пө. Reward invariance in Definition 3.1
reads r(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = r(s, a) for all Пө. Differentiating at Пө = 0 and using the chain rule gives
0 = d
dПөr(gПө(s), hПө(a))

Пө=0
= вҲҮsr(s, a) В· d
dПөgПө(s)

Пө=0
+ вҲҮar(s, a) В· d
dПөhПө(a)

Пө=0
,
which is exactly (12).
For each fixed Пө, Definition 3.1 gives that for all f вҲҲC2(S),
 La(f в—ҰgПө)

(s) =
 (LhПө(a)f) в—ҰgПө

(s) =
 LhПө(a)f

(gПө(s)).
(57)
Write the controlled generator in coordinates as
(Laf)(x) = b(x, a) В· вҲҮf(x) + 1
2 tr
 Q(x, a) вҲҮ2f(x)

,
Q(x, a) = ОЈ(x, a)ОЈ(x, a)вҠӨ.
Set xПө := gПө(s) and denote the Jacobian matrix and second derivatives of gПө by
JПө(s) := вҲҮsgПө(s) вҲҲRdГ—d,
 вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s)

ij := вҲӮij
 gk
Пө (s)

, k = 1, . . . , d.
For later use we expand the first and second spatial derivatives of f в—ҰgПө at s. By the chain rule, for
each i = 1, . . . , d,
вҲӮi(f в—ҰgПө)(s) =
d
X
k=1
(вҲӮkf)(xПө) вҲӮi(gk
Пө )(s),
i.e.
вҲҮ(f в—ҰgПө)(s) = JПө(s)вҠӨвҲҮf(xПө).
Differentiating once more and using product/chain rules yields, for each i, j,
вҲӮij(f в—ҰgПө)(s) =
d
X
k,в„“=1
(вҲӮkв„“f)(xПө) вҲӮi(gk
Пө )(s) вҲӮj(gв„“
Пө)(s) +
d
X
k=1
(вҲӮkf)(xПө) вҲӮij(gk
Пө )(s).
Equivalently in matrix form,
вҲҮ2(f в—ҰgПө)(s) = JПө(s)вҠӨвҲҮ2f(xПө)JПө(s) +
d
X
k=1
 вҲӮkf(xПө)

вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s).
Plugging these into the left-hand side of (57) gives
 La(f в—ҰgПө)

(s) = b(s, a) В· вҲҮ(f в—ҰgПө)(s) + 1
2 tr

Q(s, a) вҲҮ2(f в—ҰgПө)(s)

= b(s, a) В· JПө(s)вҠӨвҲҮf(xПө) + 1
2 tr

Q(s, a) JПө(s)вҠӨвҲҮ2f(xПө)JПө(s)

+ 1
d
X
k=1
 вҲӮkf(xПө)

tr

Q(s, a) вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s)

.
Using cyclicity of trace, define
eQПө(s, a) := JПө(s) Q(s, a) JПө(s)вҠӨ,
and define the correction vector cПө(s, a) вҲҲRd by
 cПө(s, a)

k := tr

Q(s, a) вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s)

,
k = 1, . . . , d.
Then
 La(f в—ҰgПө)

(s) =

JПө(s)b(s, a) + 1
2cПө(s, a)

В· вҲҮf(xПө) + 1
2 tr

eQПө(s, a) вҲҮ2f(xПө)

.
(58)
On the other hand, the right-hand side of (57) is
 LhПө(a)f

(xПө) = b(xПө, hПө(a)) В· вҲҮf(xПө) + 1
2 tr

Q(xПө, hПө(a)) вҲҮ2f(xПө)

.
(59)
Since (57) holds for all f вҲҲC2(S), comparing (58) and (59) yields
uПө В· вҲҮf(xПө) + 1
2 tr(MПөвҲҮ2f(xПө)) = 0
for all f вҲҲC2(S),
where
uПө := JПө(s)b(s, a) + 1
2cПө(s, a) вҲ’b(xПө, hПө(a)),
and
MПө := JПө(s)Q(s, a)JПө(s)вҠӨвҲ’Q(xПө, hПө(a)).
Since the identity holds for all f вҲҲC2(S), take local quadratic test functions f(x) = p В· (x вҲ’
xПө) + 1
2(x вҲ’xПө)вҠӨH(x вҲ’xПө), multiplied by a smooth cutoff if needed. Thus вҲҮf(xПө) = p and
вҲҮ2f(xПө) = H can be chosen arbitrarily. Choosing H = 0 and arbitrary p gives uПө = 0; choosing
p = 0 and arbitrary symmetric H gives MПө = 0. uПө = 0 and MПө = 0. Therefore, for each Пө,
Q(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = JПө(s)Q(s, a)JПө(s)вҠӨ,
(60)
and
b(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = JПө(s)b(s, a) + 1
2cПө(s, a),
(cПө)k = tr

Q(s, a)вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s)

.
(61)
We now differentiate (60) and (61) at Пө = 0. Smoothness of the flows gives
gПө(s) = s + ПөX(s) + o(Пө),
hПө(a) = a + ПөY (a) + o(Пө),
JПө(s) = I + ПөвҲҮsX(s) + o(Пө),
вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s) = ПөвҲҮ2
sXk(s) + o(Пө).
For the diffusion coefficient,
Q(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = Q(s, a) + Пө
 вҲҮsQ(s, a)[X(s)] + вҲҮaQ(s, a)[Y (a)]

+ o(Пө),
whereas
JПө(s)Q(s, a)JПө(s)вҠӨ= Q(s, a) + Пө
 (вҲҮsX(s))Q(s, a) + Q(s, a)(вҲҮsX(s))вҠӨ
+ o(Пө).
Equating the O(Пө) terms gives
вҲҮsQ(s, a)[X(s)] вҲ’(вҲҮsX(s))Q(s, a) вҲ’Q(s, a)(вҲҮsX(s))вҠӨ+ вҲҮaQ(s, a)[Y (a)] = 0,
which is (14).
For the drift coefficient,
b(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = b(s, a) + Пө
 вҲҮsb(s, a)X(s) + вҲҮab(s, a)Y (a)

+ o(Пө),
whereas
JПө(s)b(s, a) + 1
2cПө(s, a) = b(s, a) + Пө
 (вҲҮsX(s))b(s, a) + 1
2вҲҶQ(s,a)X(s)

+ o(Пө).
Equating the O(Пө) terms gives
вҲҮsb(s, a)X(s) вҲ’(вҲҮsX(s))b(s, a) + вҲҮab(s, a)Y (a) вҲ’1
2вҲҶQ(s,a)X(s) = 0,
which is (13). This completes the proof.
F.4
Proof of Theorem 3.4
Proof. Fix (s, a) вҲҲв„Ұand fix |Пө| < Пө0 small enough so that all points that appear below stay in в„Ұ
(which is possible by openness of в„Ұand continuity of (Пө, s, a) 7вҶ’(gПө(s), hПө(a))). We first prove
reward invariance, then generator equivariance.
Reward invariance follows by differentiating along the flow. Define ПҒ(Пө) := r(gПө(s), hПө(a)). Using
d
dПөgПө(s) = X(gПө(s)) and d
dПөhПө(a) = Y (hПө(a)), the chain rule gives
ПҒвҖІ(Пө) = вҲҮsr(gПө(s), hПө(a)) В· X(gПө(s)) + вҲҮar(gПө(s), hПө(a)) В· Y (hПө(a)).
Since (12) holds on в„Ұ, the right-hand side is 0 whenever (gПө(s), hПө(a)) вҲҲв„Ұ. Hence ПҒвҖІ(Пө) = 0 for all
such Пө, so ПҒ(Пө) вүЎПҒ(0) = r(s, a) and thus r(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = r(s, a), i.e. (9) holds on в„Ұ.
For generator equivariance, define
sПө := gПө(s),
aПө := hПө(a),
JПө(s) := вҲҮsgПө(s).
We first derive finite coefficient transport identities. Since (14) holds along (sПө, aПө), the matrix
ВҜQПө := Q(gПө(s), hПө(a))
satisfies
ВҜQвҖІ
Пө = (вҲҮsX(sПө)) ВҜQПө + ВҜQПө(вҲҮsX(sПө))вҠӨ,
ВҜQ0 = Q(s, a).
The matrix
ЛҶQПө := JПө(s)Q(s, a)JПө(s)вҠӨ
satisfies the same ODE and the same initial condition. Hence
Q(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = JПө(s)Q(s, a)JПө(s)вҠӨ.
Similarly, using (13) and the Hessian evolution of gПө, one obtains
b(gПө(s), hПө(a)) = JПө(s)b(s, a) + 1
2cПө(s, a),
(cПө)k = tr
 Q(s, a)вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s)

.
Now let f вҲҲC2(S). By the chain rule,
вҲҮ(f в—ҰgПө)(s) = JПө(s)вҠӨвҲҮf(gПө(s)),
and
вҲҮ2(f в—ҰgПө)(s) = JПө(s)вҠӨвҲҮ2f(gПө(s))JПө(s) +
d
X
k=1
вҲӮkf(gПө(s)) вҲҮ2
sgk
Пө (s).
Therefore,
(La(f в—ҰgПө))(s) =
 JПөb(s, a) + 1
2cПө(s, a)

В· вҲҮf(gПө(s))
+ 1
2 tr

JПөQ(s, a)JвҠӨ
Пө вҲҮ2f(gПө(s))

= b(gПө(s), hПө(a)) В· вҲҮf(gПө(s)) + 1
2 tr

Q(gПө(s), hПө(a))вҲҮ2f(gПө(s))

= (LhПө(a)f)(gПө(s)).
Thus
LaUgПө = UgПөLhПө(a).
Together with reward invariance already proved, (gПө, hПө) is an exact value-preserving structure on
в„Ұ.
F.5
Proof of Theorem 3.5
Proof. Fix a point s0 in the neighborhood where the hypotheses hold. Because D is a smooth
distribution of constant rank K, there exists a (possibly smaller) neighborhood U of s0 and smooth
vector fields X1, . . . , XK on U such that D(s) = span{X1(s), . . . , XK(s)} for all s вҲҲU and
{X1(s), . . . , XK(s)} is linearly independent for every s вҲҲU. Indeed, in any local chart, D is
represented by a rank-K smooth subbundle of TU, and constant rank allows choosing a smooth local
frame.
Since the Xi span D and D is involutive, for each i, j there exist smooth coefficient functions
c1
ij, . . . , cK
ij on U such that
[Xi, Xj] =
K
X
в„“=1
cв„“
ij Xв„“
on U.
(62)
Because X1(s0) Мё= 0, after shrinking U if necessary we may assume X1(s) Мё= 0 for all s вҲҲU. We
will straighten X1 and then reduce the rank by one on a transversal, using involutivity to guarantee
that the reduction is well-defined.
We invoke the flow-box (straightening) theorem for a nonvanishing smooth vector field. There exist
local coordinates П• : U вҶ’V вҠӮRd, П•(s) = (y1, . . . , yK, z1, . . . , zdвҲ’K), with П•(s0) = 0, such that
in these coordinates the pushforward of X1 is the constant coordinate field:
П•вҲ—X1 =
вҲӮ
вҲӮy1
on V.
(63)
Equivalently, writing s = П•вҲ’1(y, z) and abusing notation by identifying vector fields with their
coordinate expressions, (63) means X1 = вҲӮy1 in (y, z)-coordinates.
Write the remaining generators X2, . . . , XK in these coordinates as
Xj =
d
X
Оұ=1
aОұ
j (y, z)
вҲӮ
вҲӮuОұ ,
u = (u1, . . . , ud) = (y1, . . . , yK, z1, . . . , zdвҲ’K),
with smooth coefficients aОұ
j . Since X1 = вҲӮy1, the Lie bracket with Xj becomes
[X1, Xj] =
"
вҲӮ
вҲӮy1 ,
d
X
Оұ=1
aОұ
j (y, z)
вҲӮ
вҲӮuОұ
#
=
d
X
Оұ=1
вҲӮaОұ
j
вҲӮy1 (y, z)
вҲӮ
вҲӮuОұ ,
because the coordinate vector fields commute and вҲӮy1 differentiates the coefficient functions. On the
other hand, by involutivity and (62) we have
[X1, Xj] =
K
X
в„“=1
cв„“
1j(y, z) Xв„“= c1
1j(y, z) вҲӮ
вҲӮy1 +
K
X
в„“=2
cв„“
1j(y, z) Xв„“.
Comparing these two expressions is useful when restricting to the transversal hypersurface
ОЈ := {(y, z) вҲҲV : y1 = 0}.
At points of ОЈ, the component of [X1, Xj] tangent to ОЈ is determined by the components of
X2, . . . , XK tangent to ОЈ. This is the mechanism that makes the reduced distribution on ОЈ in-
volutive.
Define the projected (tangential) vector fields on ОЈ by restricting each Xj (j вүҘ2) to ОЈ and discarding
the вҲӮy1 component:
ВҜXj := Xj

ОЈ вҲ’
 Xjy1
ОЈ
вҲӮ
вҲӮy1

ОЈ,
j = 2, . . . , K.
Then each ВҜXj is a smooth vector field on ОЈ taking values in TОЈ. Let ВҜD be the distribution on ОЈ
spanned by ВҜX2, . . . , ВҜXK; it has rank K вҲ’1 near 0 because X1, . . . , XK are linearly independent
and X1 is transverse to ОЈ.
We claim that ВҜD is involutive on ОЈ. To see this, take i, j вҲҲ{2, . . . , K}. Because Xi and Xj are
tangent to D and D is involutive, [Xi, Xj] is a linear combination of X1, . . . , XK. Restricting to
ОЈ, the tangential component of [Xi, Xj] along ОЈ is therefore a linear combination of the tangential
components of X2, . . . , XK along ОЈ, i.e. a linear combination of ВҜX2, . . . , ВҜXK. More explicitly, write
on U
[Xi, Xj] =
K
X
в„“=1
cв„“
ij Xв„“
and restrict to ОЈ; since X1 = вҲӮy1 is normal to ОЈ and ВҜXв„“is the tangential part of Xв„“for в„“вүҘ2,
the tangential projection of [Xi, Xj]

ОЈ equals PK
в„“=2(cв„“
ij|ОЈ) ВҜXв„“. But the tangential projection of
[Xi, Xj]

ОЈ is exactly [ ВҜXi, ВҜXj] because brackets of tangent vector fields on ОЈ computed as restrictions
agree with intrinsic brackets on ОЈ. Hence [ ВҜXi, ВҜXj] вҲҲВҜD on ОЈ. Therefore ВҜD is involutive and has
constant rank K вҲ’1 near 0 вҲҲОЈ.
At this point we apply induction on the rank. For K = 1, the straightening theorem already produces
coordinates (y1, z1, . . . , zdвҲ’1) with X1 = вҲӮy1, and then each zОұ is constant along the integral curves
of X1 because вҲӮy1zОұ = 0. Assume the claim holds for rank K вҲ’1 distributions in dimension d вҲ’1.
Applying the induction hypothesis to the involutive constant-rank distribution ВҜD on the (d вҲ’1)-
dimensional manifold ОЈ, we obtain (d вҲ’1) вҲ’(K вҲ’1) = d вҲ’K smooth functions ВҜI1, . . . , ВҜIdвҲ’K on
a neighborhood ОЈ0 вҠӮОЈ of 0 such that their differentials are linearly independent on ОЈ0 and
ВҜXj ВҜIОұ = 0
on ОЈ0, вҲҖj = 2, . . . , K, вҲҖОұ = 1, . . . , d вҲ’K.
(64)
Equivalently, ВҜI = (ВҜI1, . . . , ВҜIdвҲ’K) is constant on the integral leaves of ВҜD in ОЈ0.
We now extend these invariants off ОЈ along the flow of X1 = вҲӮy1. Define, for (y, z) near 0,
IОұ(y, z) := ВҜIОұ(0, y2, . . . , yK, z1, . . . , zdвҲ’K),
Оұ = 1, . . . , d вҲ’K,
(65)
i.e. IОұ is independent of y1 and coincides with ВҜIОұ on ОЈ. By construction,
X1IОұ = вҲӮIОұ
вҲӮy1 = 0.
(66)
We next show XjIОұ = 0 for j = 2, . . . , K. Fix j вҲҲ{2, . . . , K} and Оұ. On ОЈ we have Xj =
(Xjy1) вҲӮy1 + ВҜXj by definition of ВҜXj, so using (65) (no y1-dependence) and (64),
(XjIОұ)

ОЈ = (Xjy1)

ОЈ В· (вҲӮy1IОұ)

ОЈ + ( ВҜXj ВҜIОұ) = 0 + 0 = 0.
Thus XjIОұ vanishes on ОЈ. To propagate this off ОЈ, differentiate XjIОұ along X1 = вҲӮy1 and use
involutivity:
X1(XjIОұ) = Xj(X1IОұ) + [X1, Xj]IОұ.
The first term is zero by (66). For the bracket term, use (62):
[X1, Xj]IОұ =
K
X
в„“=1
cв„“
1j Xв„“IОұ.
We already have X1IОұ = 0 and we are studying XjIОұ for j вүҘ2. Consider the vector w(Пө) вҲҲRKвҲ’1
with components wj(Пө) := (XjIОұ)(gПө(s0)) for j = 2, . . . , K, along the X1-flow; the identity
above implies w satisfies a linear ODE of the form wвҖІ(Пө) = A(Пө) w(Пө) with continuous coefficients
determined by cв„“
1j, and the initial condition at Пө = 0 (i.e. on ОЈ) is w(0) = 0. Uniqueness of solutions
to linear ODEs yields w(Пө) вүЎ0 for small Пө, hence XjIОұ = 0 in a neighborhood of 0 in V for all
j = 2, . . . , K and all Оұ. Together with (66), we have shown
XiIОұ = 0
for all i = 1, . . . , K, Оұ = 1, . . . , d вҲ’K
(67)
on a neighborhood U0 вҠӮU of s0.
The relations (67) mean precisely that each IОұ is constant along any curve tangent to D, hence
constant on each integral leaf of D in U0. It remains to verify functional independence. In the
coordinates (y, z) constructed above, the functions IОұ depend only on (y2, . . . , yK, z) through (65),
and their differentials are independent on ОЈ0 by construction of ВҜI. Since extending by keeping them
independent of y1 does not create new linear dependencies among the differentials, the covectors
dI1, . . . , dIdвҲ’K remain linearly independent on a neighborhood of 0 in V . Equivalently, the map
I = (I1, . . . , IdвҲ’K) has rank d вҲ’K and thus provides (d вҲ’K) functionally independent invariants,
constant on the integral leaves. Writing z := I(s) gives local intrinsic coordinates for the orbit/leaf
space, without the need to explicitly form a quotient S/G.
F.6
Proof of Theorem 3.6
Lemma F.3 (Transport of the HJB under an exact value-preserving structure). Assume Assumption B.9.
Fix any П‘ вҲҲG and let (gП‘, hП‘) be an exact value-preserving structure in the sense of Definition 3.1.
Suppose u is a (bounded) solution of the stationary HJB equation in Assumption B.9, i.e.,
ОІ u(s) = max
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a) + (Lau)(s)
o
,
вҲҖs вҲҲS,
(68)
in the solution concept stipulated by Assumption B.9 (e.g., classical C2 or viscosity). Define the
transformed function uП‘ : S вҶ’R by
uП‘(s) := u(gП‘(s)).
(69)
Then uП‘ is also a solution of (68). In particular, if Assumption B.9 guarantees uniqueness of the
(bounded) solution to (68), then uП‘ вүЎu and hence u(gП‘(s)) = u(s) for all s.
Proof. Fix П‘ вҲҲG and define uП‘ by (69). We show that uП‘ satisfies (68) pointwise. Let s вҲҲS be
arbitrary and write sвҖІ := gП‘(s). Since u solves (68), at the point sвҖІ we have
ОІ u(sвҖІ) = max
aвҖІвҲҲA
n
r(sвҖІ, aвҖІ) + (LaвҖІu)(sвҖІ)
o
.
(70)
Now use that hП‘ : A вҶ’A is a bijection (as required by the symmetry definition), so the set
{hП‘(a) : a вҲҲA} equals A. Therefore, the maximization over aвҖІ вҲҲA can be re-parameterized by
aвҖІ = hП‘(a), yielding the exact identity
max
aвҖІвҲҲA
n
r(sвҖІ, aвҖІ) + (LaвҖІu)(sвҖІ)
o
= max
aвҲҲA
n
r(sвҖІ, hП‘(a)) + (LhП‘(a)u)(sвҖІ)
o
.
(71)
Substituting (71) into (70) and recalling sвҖІ = gП‘(s) gives
ОІ u(gП‘(s)) = max
aвҲҲA
n
r(gП‘(s), hП‘(a)) + (LhП‘(a)u)(gП‘(s))
o
.
(72)
Next we invoke the two exact-symmetry equalities from Definition 3.1. First, reward invariance gives,
for every a вҲҲA,
r(gП‘(s), hП‘(a)) = r(s, a).
(73)
Second, generator equivariance gives, for every sufficiently smooth test function f (in particular for
f = u in the classical case, or for the test functions used in the viscosity definition),
(LhП‘(a)f)
 gП‘(s)

=
 La(f в—ҰgП‘)

(s).
(74)
Applying (8) with f = u and using (69) (so that u в—ҰgП‘ = uП‘) yields, for every a вҲҲA,
(LhП‘(a)u)
 gП‘(s)

=
 La(u в—ҰgП‘)

(s) =
 LauП‘

(s).
(75)
Substituting (9) and (75) into (72) gives
ОІ u(gП‘(s)) = max
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a) + (LauП‘)(s)
o
.
(76)
Finally, by definition (69), the left-hand side equals ОІ uП‘(s). Hence (76) is exactly
ОІ uП‘(s) = max
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a) + (LauП‘)(s)
o
,
вҲҖs вҲҲS,
which is (68) for uП‘. If Assumption B.9 asserts uniqueness of the (bounded) HJB solution, we
conclude uП‘ вүЎu, i.e., u(gП‘(s)) = u(s) for all s.
Proof of Theorem 3.6. Fix П‘ вҲҲG and define VП‘(s) := V вӢҶ(gП‘(s)). By Assumption B.9, the optimal
value V вӢҶis a (bounded) solution of the HJB equation (68) (with u = V вӢҶ) and, moreover, is the
unique (bounded) solution in the solution class specified by Assumption B.9. Since (gП‘, hП‘) is an
exact value-preserving structure, Lemma F.3 applies with u = V вӢҶand yields that VП‘ is also a solution
of the same HJB equation. By uniqueness, we must have VП‘ вүЎV вӢҶ, namely
V вӢҶ(gП‘(s)) = V вӢҶ(s),
вҲҖs вҲҲS.
Because П‘ вҲҲG was arbitrary, this establishes (18). For the invariant-coordinate representation,
work on a neighborhood U вҠӮS where Theorem 3.5 provides a complete invariant coordinate map
I : U вҶ’Rk in the stated sense: if s1, s2 вҲҲU and I(s1) = I(s2), then there exists П‘ вҲҲG such that
s2 = gП‘(s1). Define a function ВҜV вӢҶon the set I(U) by the rule
ВҜV вӢҶ(z) := V вӢҶ(s)
for any s вҲҲU with I(s) = z.
(77)
We first check that (77) is well-defined. Indeed, if s1, s2 вҲҲU both satisfy I(s1) = I(s2) = z,
completeness of I implies s2 = gП‘(s1) for some П‘ вҲҲG, and the already-proved invariance (18)
implies
V вӢҶ(s2) = V вӢҶ(gП‘(s1)) = V вӢҶ(s1),
so the value assigned by (77) does not depend on the choice of representative s. Finally, for any
s вҲҲU, taking z = I(s) and choosing s itself as the representative in (77) gives ВҜV вӢҶ(I(s)) = V вӢҶ(s),
i.e.,
V вӢҶ(s) = ВҜV вӢҶ(I(s))
for all s вҲҲU,
which is the desired local factorization through invariant coordinates.
F.7
Proof of Corollary 3.7
Lemma F.4 (Hamiltonian invariance at the HJB maximand). Fix П‘ вҲҲG. Assume reward invariance
(9) and that the generator/action intertwining is in the (evolution-then-transform equals transform-
then-evolution) pointwise form: for all a вҲҲA, all f вҲҲC2(S), and all s вҲҲS,
(LhП‘(a)f)
 gП‘(s)

=
 La(f в—ҰgП‘)

(s).
(78)
Then for the optimal value V вӢҶ(which is invariant by Theorem 3.6), the HJB maximand
H(s, a) := r(s, a) + (LaV вӢҶ)(s)
satisfies, for all (s, a),
H
 gП‘(s), hП‘(a)

= H(s, a).
(79)
Proof. Fix (s, a) and П‘. By reward invariance (9),
r
 gП‘(s), hП‘(a)

= r(s, a).
For the generator term, apply (78) with f = V вӢҶ:
(LhП‘(a)V вӢҶ)
 gП‘(s)

=
 La(V вӢҶв—ҰgП‘)

(s).
By Theorem 3.6, V вӢҶв—ҰgП‘ = V вӢҶpointwise on S, hence
 La(V вӢҶв—ҰgП‘)

(s) =
 LaV вӢҶ
(s).
Adding the reward identity yields (79).
Proof of Corollary 3.7. Fix П‘ вҲҲG and s вҲҲS. Define H(s, a) := r(s, a) + (LaV вӢҶ)(s), so that
Argmax(s) = arg max
aвҲҲA H(s, a).
Let a вҲҲArgmax(s). We must show hП‘(a) вҲҲArgmax(gП‘(s)), i.e.,
H
 gП‘(s), hП‘(a)

вүҘH
 gП‘(s), aвҖІ
вҲҖaвҖІ вҲҲA.
Take an arbitrary aвҖІ вҲҲA. Because hП‘ : A вҶ’A is a bijection, there exists a unique Лңa вҲҲA such that
aвҖІ = hП‘(Лңa). By Lemma F.4,
H
 gП‘(s), aвҖІ
= H
 gП‘(s), hП‘(Лңa)

= H(s, Лңa),
H
 gП‘(s), hП‘(a)

= H(s, a).
Since a вҲҲArgmax(s), we have H(s, a) вүҘH(s, Лңa) for every Лңa вҲҲA, hence in particular
H
 gП‘(s), hП‘(a)

= H(s, a) вүҘH(s, Лңa) = H
 gП‘(s), aвҖІ
.
Because aвҖІ was arbitrary, this proves hП‘(a) вҲҲArgmax(gП‘(s)).
For the final sentence, note that the implication just proved shows the set-valued map Argmax(В·)
is orbit-consistent: if aвӢҶ(s) вҲҲArgmax(s) then hП‘(aвӢҶ(s)) вҲҲArgmax(gП‘(s)). Therefore, on
any neighborhood where one can choose a selector that is additionally equivariant (i.e., satisfies
aвӢҶ(gП‘(s)) = hП‘(aвӢҶ(s))), that selector is automatically optimal pointwise because it selects from
Argmax(В·) everywhere on that neighborhood.
F.8
Proof of Theorem 4.2
Proof. Fix П‘ вҲҲG and write g := gП‘, h := hП‘. Let
W(s) := (V вӢҶв—Ұg)(s) = V вӢҶ(g(s)).
Define the HJB maximand (Hamiltonian) operator
H[U](s) := sup
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a) + (LaU)(s)
o
.
By Assumption B.9 and Theorem 2.1, V вӢҶis a bounded (classical) solution of
ОІV вӢҶ(s) = H[V вӢҶ](s),
вҲҖs вҲҲS.
(80)
We first show that W satisfies an approximate HJB equation with a uniform residual. Set
Оҙ := Оөr + ОөL вҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘC2.
Take an arbitrary state s вҲҲS. Evaluate the HJB identity (80) at the transformed state g(s):
ОІV вӢҶ(g(s)) = sup
aвҖІвҲҲA
n
r(g(s), aвҖІ) + (LaвҖІV вӢҶ)(g(s))
o
.
(81)
Because h : A вҶ’A is a bijection (group action on actions), we may reparameterize the supremum
by aвҖІ = h(a):
sup
aвҖІвҲҲA
n
r(g(s), aвҖІ) + (LaвҖІV вӢҶ)(g(s))
o
= sup
aвҲҲA
n
r(g(s), h(a)) + (Lh(a)V вӢҶ)(g(s))
o
.
(82)
Substituting (82) into (81) and using W(s) = V вӢҶ(g(s)) yields
ОІW(s) = sup
aвҲҲA
n
r(g(s), h(a)) + (Lh(a)V вӢҶ)(g(s))
o
.
(83)
Now apply approximate reward invariance (20): for every a вҲҲA,
вҲ’Оөr вүӨr(g(s), h(a)) вҲ’r(s, a) вүӨОөr.
(84)
Next apply the approximate generator equivariance at the test function f = V вӢҶ(recall V вӢҶвҲҲ
C2(S) вҲ©F). In the pointwise pushed-forward form consistent with the HJB transport used earlier,
for every a вҲҲA and s вҲҲS we have
(Lh(a)V вӢҶ)(g(s)) вҲ’(La(V вӢҶв—Ұg))(s)
 вүӨОөL вҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘC2 = Оҙ вҲ’Оөr.
(85)
Combining (84) and (85) gives, for every a,
r(g(s), h(a)) + (Lh(a)V вӢҶ)(g(s)) вүӨr(s, a) + (LaW)(s) + Оҙ,
and also the reverse inequality
r(g(s), h(a)) + (Lh(a)V вӢҶ)(g(s)) вүҘr(s, a) + (LaW)(s) вҲ’Оҙ.
Taking the supremum over a вҲҲA in both displays and using (83) yields the two-sided residual bound
H[W](s) вҲ’Оҙ вүӨОІW(s) вүӨH[W](s) + Оҙ,
вҲҖs вҲҲS,
(86)
equivalently
ОІW(s) вҲ’H[W](s)
 вүӨОҙ,
вҲҖs вҲҲS.
We now convert the residual inequality (86) into the stated uniform bound on W вҲ’V вӢҶ. The argument
is a discounted maximum principle comparison; we include it as a lemma for completeness.
Lemma F.5 (Residual comparison for discounted HJB under ellipticity). Assume b, Q, r satisfy
Assumption B.9(i)-(ii) and let U, V вҲҲC2(S) be bounded. Assume V solves ОІV = H[V ] pointwise
and U satisfies |ОІU вҲ’H[U]| вүӨОҙ pointwise. Then
вҲҘU вҲ’V вҲҘвҲһвүӨОҙ
ОІ .
Proof. Let M := supsвҲҲS(U(s)вҲ’V (s)) and fix О· > 0. Choose sО· such that U(sО·)вҲ’V (sО·) вүҘM вҲ’О·.
Define the penalized function
ОҰО·(s) := U(s) вҲ’V (s) вҲ’О· вҲҘs вҲ’sО·вҲҘ2.
Under Assumption B.9(iii), we may work on a neighborhood where ОҰО· attains a maximum at some
ВҜsО·. At ВҜsО· we have the first- and second-order conditions
вҲҮОҰО·(ВҜsО·) = 0,
вҲҮ2ОҰО·(ВҜsО·) вӘҜ0,
hence
вҲҮ(U вҲ’V )(ВҜsО·) = 2О·(ВҜsО· вҲ’sО·),
вҲҮ2(U вҲ’V )(ВҜsО·) вӘҜ2О·I.
Fix any a вҲҲA and consider the linear operator La in ItГҙ form Laf = b(В·, a)В·вҲҮf + 1
2 tr(Q(В·, a)вҲҮ2f).
Using boundedness of b and Q from Assumption B.9(i) and Q вӘ°0, we obtain at ВҜsО·
(La(U вҲ’V ))(ВҜsО·) = b(ВҜsО·, a) В· вҲҮ(U вҲ’V )(ВҜsО·) + 1
2 tr
 Q(ВҜsО·, a)вҲҮ2(U вҲ’V )(ВҜsО·)

вүӨC1О·,
where C1 is a constant independent of О· (coming from вҲҘbвҲҘвҲһand вҲҘQвҲҘвҲһ), because вҲҘвҲҮ(UвҲ’V )(ВҜsО·)вҲҘ=
2О·вҲҘВҜsО· вҲ’sО·вҲҘand вҲҮ2(U вҲ’V )(ВҜsО·) вӘҜ2О·I imply the drift term is O(О·) and the diffusion term is
вүӨО· tr(Q(ВҜsО·, a)) вүӨCО·. Therefore, for every a,
r(ВҜsО·, a)+(LaU)(ВҜsО·) = r(ВҜsО·, a)+(LaV )(ВҜsО·)+(La(U вҲ’V ))(ВҜsО·) вүӨr(ВҜsО·, a)+(LaV )(ВҜsО·)+C1О·.
Taking the supremum over a yields
H[U](ВҜsО·) вүӨH[V ](ВҜsО·) + C1О· = ОІV (ВҜsО·) + C1О·.
Using the residual upper bound ОІU вүӨH[U] + Оҙ at ВҜsО· gives
ОІU(ВҜsО·) вүӨH[U](ВҜsО·) + Оҙ вүӨОІV (ВҜsО·) + Оҙ + C1О·,
hence
U(ВҜsО·) вҲ’V (ВҜsО·) вүӨОҙ
ОІ + C1
ОІ О·.
Because ВҜsО· maximizes ОҰО·, we have
M вҲ’О· вүӨU(sО·) вҲ’V (sО·) вүӨU(ВҜsО·) вҲ’V (ВҜsО·),
so
M вҲ’О· вүӨОҙ
ОІ + C1
ОІ О·.
Letting О· вҶ“0 yields M вүӨОҙ/ОІ, i.e. sup(U вҲ’V ) вүӨОҙ/ОІ. Applying the same argument to V вҲ’U
(using |ОІU вҲ’H[U]| вүӨОҙ) yields sup(V вҲ’U) вүӨОҙ/ОІ. Therefore вҲҘU вҲ’V вҲҘвҲһвүӨОҙ/ОІ.
Apply Lemma F.5 with U = W and V = V вӢҶ. The residual bound (86) gives |ОІW вҲ’H[W]| вүӨОҙ and
(80) gives ОІV вӢҶ= H[V вӢҶ], hence
вҲҘW вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨОҙ
ОІ = 1
ОІ

Оөr + ОөLвҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘC2

.
Recalling W = V вӢҶв—ҰgП‘ proves (21).
F.9
Proof of Theorem B.2
Proof. Let w := (Оё, П•) вҲҲRm collect all parameters and write
F(w) := Lsym(Оё, П•).
The SGD iterate is
wt+1 = wt вҲ’О· gt,
E[gt | wt] = вҲҮF(wt),
E

вҲҘgt вҲ’вҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 | wt

вүӨПғ2.
Since F is L-smooth, for any x, y we have the standard descent inequality
F(y) вүӨF(x) + вҹЁвҲҮF(x), y вҲ’xвҹ©+ L
2 вҲҘy вҲ’xвҲҘ2
2.
(87)
Apply (87) with x = wt and y = wt+1 = wt вҲ’О·gt, so that y вҲ’x = вҲ’О·gt. This gives the one-step
bound
F(wt+1) вүӨF(wt) + вҹЁвҲҮF(wt), вҲ’О·gtвҹ©+ L
2 вҲҘвҲ’О·gtвҲҘ2
= F(wt) вҲ’О·вҹЁвҲҮF(wt), gtвҹ©+ LО·2
2 вҲҘgtвҲҘ2
2.
(88)
Take conditional expectation w.r.t. wt. By unbiasedness,
E

вҹЁвҲҮF(wt), gtвҹ©| wt

= вҹЁвҲҮF(wt), E[gt | wt]вҹ©= вҹЁвҲҮF(wt), вҲҮF(wt)вҹ©= вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2.
(89)
For the second moment, expand вҲҘgtвҲҘ2
2 around вҲҮF(wt):
E

вҲҘgtвҲҘ2
2 | wt

= E

вҲҘ(gt вҲ’вҲҮF(wt)) + вҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 | wt

= E

вҲҘgt вҲ’вҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 | wt

+ 2 E

вҹЁgt вҲ’вҲҮF(wt), вҲҮF(wt)вҹ©| wt

+ вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2.
(90)
The cross term vanishes because E[gt вҲ’вҲҮF(wt) | wt] = 0, hence
E

вҲҘgtвҲҘ2
2 | wt

= вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 + E

вҲҘgt вҲ’вҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 | wt

вүӨвҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 + Пғ2.
(91)
Taking conditional expectation of (88) and using (89)-(91) yields
E[F(wt+1) | wt] вүӨF(wt) вҲ’О· вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 + LО·2
 вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 + Пғ2
= F(wt) вҲ’О·

1 вҲ’LО·

вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 + LО·2
2 Пғ2.
(92)
Under О· вүӨ1/L, we have 1 вҲ’LО·
2 вүҘ1
2, so (92) implies
E[F(wt+1) | wt] вүӨF(wt) вҲ’О·
2вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 + LО·2
2 Пғ2.
(93)
Now take full expectation and rearrange:
О·
2 E

вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2

вүӨE

F(wt)

вҲ’E

F(wt+1)

+ LО·2
2 Пғ2.
(94)
Sum (94) from t = 0 to T вҲ’1:
О·
T вҲ’1
X
t=0
E

вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2

вүӨ
T вҲ’1
X
t=0

E[F(wt)] вҲ’E[F(wt+1)]

+ LО·2
2 TПғ2
= E[F(w0)] вҲ’E[F(wT )] + LО·2
2 TПғ2.
(95)
Using the lower bound F(wT ) вүҘLinf almost surely, hence E[F(wT )] вүҘLinf, we obtain
О·
T вҲ’1
X
t=0
E

вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2

вүӨF(w0) вҲ’Linf + LО·2
2 TПғ2.
Divide by О·T/2 to get
T
T вҲ’1
X
t=0
E

вҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2

вүӨ2(F(w0) вҲ’Linf)
О·T
+ О·LПғ2,
which is exactly (28) (recall F = Lsym and w0 = (Оё0, П•0)). For a rate statement, note that
min0вүӨtвүӨT вҲ’1 EвҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 вүӨ
T
PT вҲ’1
t=0 EвҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2. Choosing a stepsize on the order of О· =
Оҳ(1/
вҲҡ
T) (or using a standard diminishing schedule with comparable aggregate), the right-hand side
becomes O(1/
вҲҡ
T), yielding min0вүӨtвүӨT вҲ’1 EвҲҘвҲҮF(wt)вҲҘ2
2 = O(1/
вҲҡ
T).
F.10
Proof of Theorem B.4
Proof. Write (s, a) вҲјПҒ and let ПҒS be the state marginal. For clarity, denote by brПү,bbПү, bQПү the learned
models and define the (estimated) determining residuals (cf. (23)-(25))
bRПү,Оё,П•
r
(s, a) := XОё(s) В· вҲҮsbrПү(s, a) + YП•(a) В· вҲҮabrПү(s, a),
bRПү,Оё,П•
b
(s, a) := вҲҮsbbПү(s, a) XОё(s) вҲ’(вҲҮsXОё(s))bbПү(s, a) + вҲҮabbПү(s, a) YП•(a) вҲ’1
2вҲҶb
QПү(s,a)XОё(s),
bRПү,Оё,П•
Q
(s, a) := вҲҮs bQПү(s, a)[XОё(s)]вҲ’(вҲҮsXОё(s)) bQПү(s, a)вҲ’bQПү(s, a) (вҲҮsXОё(s))вҠӨ+вҲҮa bQПү(s, a)[YП•(a)].
Let L(N)
sym(Оё, П•) denote the penalized objective in (26) when trained on a dataset of size N (with the
corresponding fitted Пү = ПүN), namely
L(N)
sym(Оё, П•) =E(s,a)вҲјПҒ
h
вҲҘbRПүN,Оё,П•
b
(s, a)вҲҘ2
2 + О»QвҲҘbRПүN,Оё,П•
Q
(s, a)вҲҘ2
F + О»r| bRПүN,Оё,П•
r
(s, a)|2i
+ О»nrm

EsвҲјПҒSвҲҘXОё(s)вҲҘ2
2 вҲ’1
2
.
(96)
By Assumption B.3, there exist (ПүвӢҶ, ОёвӢҶ, П•вӢҶ) such that bbПүвӢҶ= b, bQПүвӢҶ= Q, brПүвӢҶ= r on supp(ПҒ), and
(XОёвӢҶ, YП•вӢҶ) satisfies the determining equations on supp(ПҒ). Equivalently, on supp(ПҒ),
RОёвӢҶ,П•вӢҶ
r
(s, a) = 0,
RОёвӢҶ,П•вӢҶ
b
(s, a) = 0,
RОёвӢҶ,П•вӢҶ
Q
(s, a) = 0,
where RОё,П•
В·
denotes the same expressions as above but with the true (b, Q, r) in place of (bbПү, bQПү, brПү).
Also, by rescaling the generator (or by the normalization penalty), one can satisfy EsвҲјПҒSвҲҘXОёвӢҶ(s)вҲҘ2
2 =
1, hence
inf
Оё,П• lim sup
NвҶ’вҲһ
L(N)
sym(Оё, П•) = 0.
(97)
Let (ОёN, П•N) be the parameters produced by the algorithm at dataset size N. The assumption that the
symmetry objective can be optimized to its global minimum with vanishing optimization error means
L(N)
sym(ОёN, П•N) вҲ’inf
Оё,П• L(N)
sym(Оё, П•) вҲ’вҶ’0
as N вҶ’вҲһ.
(98)
Combining (97) and (98) yields
L(N)
sym(ОёN, П•N) вҲ’вҶ’0.
(99)
Because every term in L(N)
sym is nonnegative, (99) implies
E(s,a)вҲјПҒвҲҘbRПүN,ОёN,П•N
b
(s, a)вҲҘ2
2 вҶ’0, E(s,a)вҲјПҒвҲҘbRПүN,ОёN,П•N
Q
(s, a)вҲҘ2
F вҶ’0, E(s,a)вҲјПҒ| bRПүN,ОёN,П•N
r
(s, a)|2 вҶ’0,
(100)
and also the normalization constraint is asymptotically satisfied:

EsвҲјПҒSвҲҘXОёN (s)вҲҘ2
2 вҲ’1
2
вҶ’0.
(101)
It remains to transfer (100) (estimated residuals) to the true determining residuals. This is the only
place where we use "consistent dynamics estimation" in a mode strong enough to control the residuals,
which depend on bbПү, bQПү, brПү and their first derivatives.
Lemma F.6 (Consistency of residuals under consistent dynamics/derivative estimation). Assume that,
on supp(ПҒ), the learned models satisfy
brПүN вҶ’r, вҲҮsbrПүN вҶ’вҲҮsr, вҲҮabrПүN вҶ’вҲҮar,
bbПүN вҶ’b, вҲҮsbbПүN вҶ’вҲҮsb, вҲҮabbПүN вҶ’вҲҮab,
bQПүN вҶ’Q, вҲҮs bQПүN вҶ’вҲҮsQ, вҲҮa bQПүN вҶ’вҲҮaQ,
in ПҒ-mean square (or uniformly on supp(ПҒ)), and that the sequence of learned fields is uniformly
bounded on supp(ПҒ) in the norms needed by the residuals, i.e. there exists C < вҲһsuch that for all
N,
E(s,a)вҲјПҒ
h
вҲҘXОёN (s)вҲҘ2
2 + вҲҘвҲҮsXОёN (s)вҲҘ2
F + вҲҘYП•N (a)вҲҘ2
i
вүӨC.
Then
E(s,a)вҲјПҒ
 bRПүN,ОёN,П•N
r
(s, a) вҲ’RОёN,П•N
r
(s, a)
2 вҶ’0,
E(s,a)вҲјПҒ
 bRПүN,ОёN,П•N
b
(s, a)вҲ’RОёN,П•N
b
(s, a)
2 вҶ’0,
E(s,a)вҲјПҒ
 bRПүN,ОёN,П•N
Q
(s, a)вҲ’RОёN,П•N
Q
(s, a)
F вҶ’0.
Proof. We show the reward residual; the others follow by the same multilinear expansions. Write
bRПүN,ОёN,П•N
r
(s, a)вҲ’RОёN,П•N
r
(s, a) = XОёN (s)В·

вҲҮsbrПүN (s, a)вҲ’вҲҮsr(s, a)

+YП•N (a)В·

вҲҮabrПүN (s, a)вҲ’вҲҮar(s, a)

.
Using (u В· v)2 вүӨвҲҘuвҲҘ2
2вҲҘvвҲҘ2
2 and (x + y)2 вүӨ2x2 + 2y2, we obtain
 bRr вҲ’Rr
2 вүӨ2вҲҘXОёN (s)вҲҘ2
вҲҮsbrПүN (s, a) вҲ’вҲҮsr(s, a)
2 + 2вҲҘYП•N (a)вҲҘ2
вҲҮabrПүN (s, a) вҲ’вҲҮar(s, a)
2.
Taking EПҒ[В·] and applying Cauchy-Schwarz to each term yields an upper bound by a product of (i)
a uniform second-moment bound on вҲҘXОёN вҲҘ2
2, вҲҘYП•N вҲҘ2
2 and (ii) the mean-square estimation errors
of вҲҮsbrПүN and вҲҮabrПүN , which vanish by the assumed consistency. Hence EПҒ| bRr вҲ’Rr|2 вҶ’0. The
drift and diffusion residuals are finite sums of products of the same type (fields and their Jacobians
times coefficient errors), so the same inequalities and consistency assumptions yield the stated
convergences.
Apply Lemma F.6 together with (100). For example,
EПҒ|RОёN,П•N
r
(s, a)|2 вүӨ2 EПҒ| bRПүN,ОёN,П•N
r
(s, a)|2 + 2 EПҒ
 bRПүN,ОёN,П•N
r
(s, a) вҲ’RОёN,П•N
r
(s, a)
2 вҲ’вҶ’0,
and likewise EПҒвҲҘRОёN,П•N
b
вҲҘ2
2 вҶ’0 and EПҒвҲҘRОёN,П•N
Q
вҲҘ2
F вҶ’0. This is exactly the claimed "ПҒ-mean"
convergence to the solution set of the determining equations on the data support: the sequence
(XОёN , YП•N ) drives the determining residuals to zero in ПҒ-mean square, hence satisfies (12)-(14) on
supp(ПҒ) in the standard ПҒ-a.e. sense.
Finally, to connect to Definition 4.1, note that on supp(ПҒ), realizability and the preceding limit imply
that the limiting infinitesimal fields solve the determining equations. By Theorem 3.4, exponentiating
such a solution produces an exact local symmetry (gОұ, hОұ) (for small |Оұ|) on the same neighborhood,
hence the corresponding reward and generator mismatches vanish there. Since the mismatches are
continuous functionals of the coefficients and fields under the smoothness assumed throughout (and
we have consistency of coefficient estimation plus vanishing determining residuals in ПҒ-mean), the
induced mismatch levels on supp(ПҒ) satisfy ОөL вҶ’0 and Оөr вҶ’0 (in the natural "on-support" sense,
e.g. ПҒ-essential supremum or ПҒ-mean square mismatch).
F.11
Proof of Theorem B.6
Lemma F.7 (Discrete GrГ¶nwall for affine recursion). Let (en)nвүҘ0 be nonnegative and satisfy
en+1 вүӨ(1 + Оіh) en + Оәhp+1
for some Оі вүҘ0, Оә вүҘ0, integer p вүҘ1, and stepsize h > 0. Then for every N вүҘ1,
eN вүӨ(1 + Оіh)Ne0 + Оәhp+1
NвҲ’1
X
j=0
(1 + Оіh)j вүӨeОіNhe0 + Оә
Оі
 eОіNh вҲ’1

hp,
with the convention eОіNhвҲ’1
Оі
:= Nh if Оі = 0.
Proof. Iterating the inequality gives
eN вүӨ(1 + Оіh)Ne0 + Оәhp+1
NвҲ’1
X
j=0
(1 + Оіh)j,
which is the standard affine recursion bound. Since (1 + Оіh)N вүӨeОіNh and the sum is a geometric
series,
NвҲ’1
X
j=0
(1 + Оіh)j = (1 + Оіh)N вҲ’1
Оіh
вүӨeОіNh вҲ’1
Оіh
,
yielding the stated inequality.
Proof of Theorem B.6. We prove the bound for the state flow; the action flow is identical with XОё
replaced by YП• and KS replaced by KA. Fix a bounded interval Оұ вҲҲ[вҲ’A, A] and define the exact
flow gОұ : S вҶ’S by the ODE
d
dП„ x(П„) = XОё(x(П„)),
x(0) = s,
gОұ(s) := x(Оұ).
By Assumption B.5, XОё is Lipschitz on the relevant compact set containing the trajectories for
|Оұ| вүӨA, so existence and uniqueness of x(П„) holds and gОұ(s) is well-defined for all s вҲҲKS and
|Оұ| вүӨA.
Let ОҰh denote the one-step numerical map of an order-p method with stepsize h applied to Лҷx = XОё(x).
For each integer N вүҘ0, define the numerical iterate
sn+1 = ОҰh(sn),
s0 = s,
ЛҶgnh(s) := sn,
so that for a given Оұ with |Оұ| вүӨA we take N := вҢҠ|Оұ|/hвҢӢand (for simplicity of exposition) assume
Оұ = Nh; the general case with a final partial step is treated by the same argument and only changes
constants.
Two standard ingredients are needed: a local truncation error bound and a stability (Lipschitz) bound
for ОҰh on the compact region. Because the method has order p, there exists a constant Оәg (depending
on p, bounds of derivatives of XОё on the compact region, and method-specific coefficients) such that
the one-step defect relative to the exact flow over time h satisfies
sup
xвҲҲKS
ОҰh(x) вҲ’gh(x)

2 вүӨОәg hp+1,
(102)
provided h is within the methodвҖҷs admissible stability range on that region. Also, since XОё is
Lipschitz on KS and the method is a one-step scheme, there exists Оіg вүҘ0 such that
вҲҘОҰh(x) вҲ’ОҰh(y)вҲҘ2 вүӨ(1 + Оіgh) вҲҘx вҲ’yвҲҘ2,
вҲҖx, y вҲҲKS,
(103)
for all sufficiently small h in the solver stability region; here Оіg depends on the Lipschitz constant of
XОё on KS and on the methodвҖҷs internal stability constants.
Fix s вҲҲKS and define the global error sequence at step n:
en(s) := вҲҘsn вҲ’gnh(s)вҲҘ2.
We bound en+1(s) in terms of en(s) using (102) and (103). Start from the identity
sn+1 вҲ’g(n+1)h(s) = ОҰh(sn) вҲ’gh(gnh(s)).
Add and subtract ОҰh(gnh(s)) to split the difference:
ОҰh(sn) вҲ’gh(gnh(s)) =
 ОҰh(sn) вҲ’ОҰh(gnh(s))

+
 ОҰh(gnh(s)) вҲ’gh(gnh(s))

.
Taking norms and applying the triangle inequality gives
en+1(s) вүӨвҲҘОҰh(sn) вҲ’ОҰh(gnh(s))вҲҘ2 + вҲҘОҰh(gnh(s)) вҲ’gh(gnh(s))вҲҘ2.
Because both the exact trajectory gnh(s) and the numerical iterate sn remain in the relevant compact
region for 0 вүӨnh вүӨA (by Assumption B.5 and standard forward-invariance on compact sets for
Lipschitz fields with small enough h), we may apply (103) to the first term and (102) to the second
term:
en+1(s) вүӨ(1 + Оіgh)en(s) + Оәghp+1.
Since e0(s) = вҲҘs0 вҲ’g0(s)вҲҘ2 = 0, Lemma F.7 yields for N = Оұ/h (with 0 вүӨОұ вүӨA)
eN(s) вүӨОәg
Оіg
 eОіgОұ вҲ’1

hp.
Taking the supremum over s вҲҲKS and over |Оұ| вүӨA gives
sup
|Оұ|вүӨA
sup
sвҲҲKS
вҲҘЛҶgОұ(s) вҲ’gОұ(s)вҲҘ2 вүӨ
Оәg
Оіg
 eОіgA вҲ’1

hp =: Cghp.
This establishes the first inequality in (29). The proof for ЛҶhОұ is identical, with constants Оәh, Оіh
depending on the Lipschitz constants of YП• on KA and the method stability characteristics, yielding
supaвҲҲKA вҲҘЛҶhОұ(a) вҲ’hОұ(a)вҲҘ2 вүӨChhp for |Оұ| вүӨA.
F.12
Proof of Theorem B.7
Lemma F.8 (Pushforward kernel вҮ’expectation transport). Let g : S вҶ’S be a measurable bijection.
For a fixed (s, a), assume
P(В· | g(s), h(a)) = g#P(В· | s, a),
i.e., for every measurable B вҠҶS,
P(B | g(s), h(a)) = P(gвҲ’1(B) | s, a).
Then for every bounded measurable f : S вҶ’R,
E[f(SвҖІвҖІ) | SвҖІвҖІ вҲјP(В· | g(s), h(a))] = E[f(g(SвҖІ)) | SвҖІ вҲјP(В· | s, a)] .
(104)
Equivalently, if SвҖІ вҲјP(В· | s, a) and SвҖІвҖІ := g(SвҖІ), then SвҖІвҖІ вҲјP(В· | g(s), h(a)).
Proof. Fix (s, a) and define Вө := P(В· | s, a) and ОҪ := P(В· | g(s), h(a)). The assumption is exactly
ОҪ = g#Вө, meaning ОҪ(B) = Вө(gвҲ’1(B)) for all measurable B. By the defining property of the
pushforward measure, for any bounded measurable f,
Z
S
f(x) ОҪ(dx) =
Z
S
f(g(x)) Вө(dx),
which is precisely (104).
Lemma F.9 (Bellman operator commutes with an exact value-preserving structure). Let the dis-
counted optimal Bellman operator T be
(TV )(s) := max
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a) + Оі ESвҖІвҲјP (В·|s,a)[V (SвҖІ)]
o
,
0 < Оі < 1.
Assume the exact value-preserving conditions hold for all (s, a):
r(g(s), h(a)) = r(s, a),
P(В· | g(s), h(a)) = g#P(В· | s, a),
and that h : A вҶ’A is a bijection. Then for every bounded V and every s,
(TV )(g(s)) =
 T(V в—Ұg)

(s).
(105)
Equivalently, writing (UgV )(s) := V (g(s)), we have the operator identity UgT = TUg on bounded
functions.
Proof. Fix s вҲҲS. Start from the definition of T at the transformed state g(s):
(TV )(g(s)) = max
aвҖІвҲҲA
n
r(g(s), aвҖІ) + Оі ESвҖІвҖІвҲјP (В·|g(s),aвҖІ)[V (SвҖІвҖІ)]
o
.
Because h is a bijection, every aвҖІ вҲҲA can be written uniquely as aвҖІ = h(a) for some a вҲҲA, hence
(TV )(g(s)) = max
aвҲҲA
n
r(g(s), h(a)) + Оі ESвҖІвҖІвҲјP (В·|g(s),h(a))[V (SвҖІвҖІ)]
o
.
Apply reward invariance r(g(s), h(a)) = r(s, a) to the first term. For the expectation term, apply
Lemma F.8 with f = V to obtain
ESвҖІвҖІвҲјP (В·|g(s),h(a))[V (SвҖІвҖІ)] = ESвҖІвҲјP (В·|s,a)[V (g(SвҖІ))] = ESвҖІвҲјP (В·|s,a)[(V в—Ұg)(SвҖІ)].
Substituting these two identities yields
(TV )(g(s)) = max
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a) + Оі ESвҖІвҲјP (В·|s,a)[(V в—Ұg)(SвҖІ)]
o
=
 T(V в—Ұg)

(s),
which is (105).
Lemma F.10 (Discounted optimal Bellman operator is a Оі-contraction in вҲҘВ· вҲҘвҲһ). For any bounded
V, W : S вҶ’R,
вҲҘTV вҲ’TWвҲҘвҲһвүӨОі вҲҘV вҲ’WвҲҘвҲһ.
Proof. Fix s вҲҲS and define for each action a the quantities
QV (s, a) := r(s, a) + Оі E[V (SвҖІ) | s, a],
QW (s, a) := r(s, a) + Оі E[W(SвҖІ) | s, a].
Then (TV )(s) = maxa QV (s, a) and (TW)(s) = maxa QW (s, a). Using the elementary inequality
 maxa xa вҲ’maxa ya
 вүӨmaxa |xa вҲ’ya|,
|(TV )(s) вҲ’(TW)(s)| вүӨmax
aвҲҲA |QV (s, a) вҲ’QW (s, a)| = Оі max
aвҲҲA
E

(V вҲ’W)(SвҖІ) | s, a
 .
By Jensen and boundedness,
E

(V вҲ’W)(SвҖІ) | s, a
 вүӨE

|(V вҲ’W)(SвҖІ)| | s, a

вүӨвҲҘV вҲ’WвҲҘвҲһ.
Hence |(TV )(s) вҲ’(TW)(s)| вүӨОівҲҘV вҲ’WвҲҘвҲһfor all s, and taking the supremum over s yields the
claim.
Proof of Theorem B.7. The statement that "the Bellman backup is invariant under augmentation
by (g, h) in expectation" is a direct consequence of Lemma F.8. Concretely, suppose one draws a
transition sample SвҖІ вҲјP(В· | s, a) and forms the augmented sample eSвҖІ := g(SвҖІ) together with the
augmented state-action pair (es, ea) := (g(s), h(a)). For any bounded value function V , the one-step
Bellman target at (es, ea) is
eY := r(es, ea) + ОіV (eSвҖІ) = r(g(s), h(a)) + ОіV (g(SвҖІ)).
Taking conditional expectation given (s, a) and using reward invariance plus Lemma F.8 gives
E[eY | s, a] = r(s, a) + Оі ESвҖІвҲјP (В·|s,a)[V (g(SвҖІ))] = r(g(s), h(a)) + Оі ESвҖІвҖІвҲјP (В·|g(s),h(a))[V (SвҖІвҖІ)],
so augmenting by (g, h) produces exactly the same expected backup as sampling directly from the
true kernel at (g(s), h(a)). In this precise sense, exact value-preserving augmentation preserves the
Bellman backup "in expectation".
Independently of augmentation, the (tabular) value-iteration recursion is Vk+1 = TVk.
By
Lemma F.10, T is a Оі-contraction in вҲҘВ·вҲҘвҲһ, hence it has a unique fixed point V вӢҶsatisfying V вӢҶ= TV вӢҶ.
Moreover,
вҲҘVk вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ= вҲҘT kV0 вҲ’T kV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨОіkвҲҘV0 вҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ,
which is the usual rate.
For completeness, the exact value-preserving structure additionally implies an equivariance identity
for the Bellman operator, given by Lemma F.9: (TV )(g(s)) = (T(V в—Ұg))(s) for all V . This
shows augmentation is not changing the underlying Bellman operator; it only replicates transitions
consistently across the orbit.
F.13
Proof of Theorem B.8
Lemma F.11 (Total variation controls expectation error). For probability measures Вө, ОҪ on S and
any bounded measurable f : S вҶ’R,

Z
f d(Вө вҲ’ОҪ)
 вүӨвҲҘfвҲҘвҲһdTV(Вө, ОҪ),
dTV(Вө, ОҪ) :=
sup
вҲҘgвҲҘвҲһвүӨ1

Z
g d(Вө вҲ’ОҪ)
.
Proof. If вҲҘfвҲҘвҲһ= 0 the claim is trivial. Otherwise define g := f/вҲҘfвҲҘвҲһ, so that вҲҘgвҲҘвҲһвүӨ1. Then

Z
f d(Вө вҲ’ОҪ)
 = вҲҘfвҲҘвҲһ

Z
g d(Вө вҲ’ОҪ)
 вүӨвҲҘfвҲҘвҲһ
sup
вҲҘuвҲҘвҲһвүӨ1

Z
u d(Вө вҲ’ОҪ)
 = вҲҘfвҲҘвҲһdTV(Вө, ОҪ).
Lemma F.12 (Bellman max is 1-Lipschitz in the action-values). For any index set A and real families
{xa}aвҲҲA, {ya}aвҲҲA,
 max
aвҲҲA xa вҲ’max
aвҲҲA ya
 вүӨmax
aвҲҲA |xa вҲ’ya|.
Proof. Let ax вҲҲarg maxa xa. Then maxa xa = xax and maxa ya вүҘyax, hence
max
a
xa вҲ’max
a
ya вүӨxax вҲ’yax вүӨmax
a
|xa вҲ’ya|.
Swapping the roles of x and y yields maxa ya вҲ’maxa xa вүӨmaxa |xa вҲ’ya|, and the claim
follows.
Lemma F.13 ( ЛңT is a Оі-contraction in вҲҘВ· вҲҘвҲһ). Let
(TV )(s) := max
aвҲҲA
n
r(s, a)+Оі
Z
V (sвҖІ) P(dsвҖІ | s, a)
o
, ( ЛңTV )(s) := max
aвҲҲA
n
Лңr(s, a)+Оі
Z
V (sвҖІ) ЛңP(dsвҖІ | s, a)
o
,
with 0 < Оі < 1 and Лңr, ЛңP any bounded reward and Markov kernel. Then for all bounded V, W,
вҲҘЛңTV вҲ’ЛңTWвҲҘвҲһвүӨОівҲҘV вҲ’WвҲҘвҲһ.
Proof. Fix s. For each a, define ЛңQV (s, a) := Лңr(s, a) + Оі
R
V d ЛңP(В· | s, a) and similarly ЛңQW . Then
by Lemma F.12,
|( ЛңTV )(s) вҲ’( ЛңTW)(s)| =
 max
a
ЛңQV (s, a) вҲ’max
a
ЛңQW (s, a)

вүӨmax
a
| ЛңQV (s, a) вҲ’ЛңQW (s, a)|
= Оі max
a

Z
(V вҲ’W) d ЛңP(В· | s, a)
.
(106)
Since |
R
(V вҲ’W) d ЛңP| вүӨ
R
|V вҲ’W| d ЛңP вүӨвҲҘV вҲ’WвҲҘвҲһ, we get |( ЛңTV )(s)вҲ’( ЛңTW)(s)| вүӨОівҲҘV вҲ’WвҲҘвҲһ.
Taking the supremum over s yields the result.
Proof of Theorem B.8. Interpret the approximately augmented model as an approximate MDP (Лңr, ЛңP)
on the same (S, A) such that
sup
s,a |Лңr(s, a) вҲ’r(s, a)| вүӨОөr,
sup
s,a dTV
  ЛңP(В· | s, a), P(В· | s, a)

вүӨОөP ,
which is exactly what (31) expresses when one sets, for each (s0, a0),
Лңr
 g(s0), h(a0)

:= r(s0, a0),
ЛңP
 В· | g(s0), h(a0)

:= g#P(В· | s0, a0).
Indeed, |Лңr(g(s0), h(a0)) вҲ’r(g(s0), h(a0))| = |r(s0, a0) вҲ’r(g(s0), h(a0))| вүӨОөr and dTV( ЛңP(В· |
g(s0), h(a0)), P(В· | g(s0), h(a0))) вүӨОөP by (31). Since (g, h) is a bijection on state-action pairs,
this implies the displayed sup-bounds over all (s, a).
Fix any bounded V . For each (s, a), define the (one-step) action-values
QV (s, a) := r(s, a)+Оі
Z
V (sвҖІ) P(dsвҖІ | s, a),
ЛңQV (s, a) := Лңr(s, a)+Оі
Z
V (sвҖІ) ЛңP(dsвҖІ | s, a).
Then
( ЛңTV )(s) вҲ’(TV )(s) = max
a
ЛңQV (s, a) вҲ’max
a
QV (s, a).
Lemma F.12 gives
|( ЛңTV )(s) вҲ’(TV )(s)| вүӨmax
aвҲҲA | ЛңQV (s, a) вҲ’QV (s, a)|.
For a fixed (s, a), expand the difference:
| ЛңQV (s, a) вҲ’QV (s, a)| =
Лңr(s, a) вҲ’r(s, a) + Оі
Z
V (sвҖІ)
  ЛңP вҲ’P

(dsвҖІ | s, a)

вүӨ|Лңr(s, a) вҲ’r(s, a)| + Оі

Z
V (sвҖІ)
  ЛңP вҲ’P

(dsвҖІ | s, a)
.
Using the uniform reward bound |Лңr вҲ’r| вүӨОөr and Lemma F.11 with Вө = ЛңP(В· | s, a), ОҪ = P(В· | s, a),
f = V yields

Z
V d( ЛңP вҲ’P)
 вүӨвҲҘV вҲҘвҲһdTV
  ЛңP(В· | s, a), P(В· | s, a)

вүӨОөP вҲҘV вҲҘвҲһ.
Substituting into the previous display gives, for every (s, a),
| ЛңQV (s, a) вҲ’QV (s, a)| вүӨОөr + Оі ОөP вҲҘV вҲҘвҲһ.
Taking maxa and then sups yields the operator perturbation bound (32):
вҲҘ( ЛңTV ) вҲ’(TV )вҲҘвҲһвүӨОөr + Оі ОөP вҲҘV вҲҘвҲһ.
Lemma F.13 shows that ЛңT is a Оі-contraction in вҲҘВ·вҲҘвҲһ, hence it admits a unique fixed point ЛңV вӢҶ= ЛңT ЛңV вӢҶ.
The true operator T is also a Оі-contraction, with unique fixed point V вӢҶ= TV вӢҶ.
To bound the fixed-point error, start from the identity
ЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶ= ЛңT ЛңV вӢҶвҲ’TV вӢҶ.
Add and subtract ЛңTV вӢҶinside the right-hand side and apply the triangle inequality:
вҲҘЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨвҲҘЛңT ЛңV вӢҶвҲ’ЛңTV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ+ вҲҘЛңTV вӢҶвҲ’TV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ.
By Lemma F.13, вҲҘЛңT ЛңV вӢҶвҲ’ЛңTV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨОівҲҘЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ. Therefore,
вҲҘЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨОівҲҘЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ+ вҲҘЛңTV вӢҶвҲ’TV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ,
which rearranges to
(1 вҲ’Оі)вҲҘЛңV вӢҶвҲ’V вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨвҲҘЛңTV вӢҶвҲ’TV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ.
Applying (32) with V = V вӢҶgives
вҲҘЛңTV вӢҶвҲ’TV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһвүӨОөr + Оі ОөP вҲҘV вӢҶвҲҘвҲһ.
Dividing by 1 вҲ’Оі yields the claimed bound (33).