ActCam: Zero-Shot Joint Camera and 3D Motion Control for Video
Generation
OMAR EL KHALIFI, Kinetix, France
THOMAS ROSSI, Kinetix, France
OSCAR FOSSEY, Kinetix, France
THIBAULT FOUQUE, Kinetix, France
ULYSSE MIZRAHI, Kinetix, France
PHILIP TORR, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
IVAN LAPTEV, MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
FABIO PIZZATI, MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
BAPTISTE BELLOT-GURLET, Kinetix, France
Fig. 1. Overview. ActCam enables zero-shot joint control of acting motion and camera motion for single-image video generation from a reference image,
assuming only widespread conditioning capability of the backbone model on depth and keypoints. Given a reference image, an acting video representing the
desired motion, and a target per-frame camera trajectory, ActCam generates a video that preserves identity while following both motion and cinematography.
For artistic applications, video generation requires fine-grained control over
both performance and cinematography-i.e., the actor’s motion and the cam-
era trajectory. We present ActCam, a zero-shot method for video generation
that jointly (i) transfers character motion from a driving video into a new
scene and (ii) enables per-frame control of intrinsic and extrinsic camera pa-
rameters. ActCam builds on any pretrained image-to-video diffusion model
that accepts conditioning in terms of scene depth and character pose. Given
a source video with a moving character and a target camera motion, ActCam
generates pose and depth conditions that remain geometrically consistent
across frames. We then run a single sampling process with a two-phase
Authors’ Contact Information: Omar El Khalifi, omar@kinetix.tech, Kinetix, France;
Thomas Rossi, thomas.r@kinetix.tech, Kinetix, France; Oscar Fossey, oscar@kinetix.
tech, Kinetix, France; Thibault Fouque, thibault@kinetix.tech, Kinetix, France; Ulysse
Mizrahi, ulysse@kinetix.tech, Kinetix, France; Philip Torr, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom; Ivan Laptev, Ivan.Laptev@mbzuai.ac.ae,
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates; Fabio Pizzati, Fabio.pizzati@mbzuai.ac.ae, MBZUAI,
United Arab Emirates; Baptiste Bellot-Gurlet, baptiste.b@kinetix.tech, Kinetix, France.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 1557-7368/2026/5-ART

conditioning schedule: early denoising steps condition on both pose and
sparse depth to enforce scene structure, after which depth is dropped and
pose-only guidance refines high-frequency details without over-constraining
the generation. We evaluate ActCam on multiple benchmarks spanning di-
verse character motions and challenging viewpoint changes. We find that,
compared to pose-only control and other pose+camera methods, ActCam
improves camera adherence and motion fidelity, and is preferred in human
evaluations-especially under large viewpoint changes. Our results high-
light that careful camera-consistent conditioning and staged guidance can
enable strong joint camera and motion control without training. Project
page: 
CCS Concepts: • Networks →Network algorithms; • Computing method-
ologies →Computer vision.
ACM Reference Format:
Omar El Khalifi, Thomas Rossi, Oscar Fossey, Thibault Fouque, Ulysse
Mizrahi, Philip Torr, Ivan Laptev, Fabio Pizzati, and Baptiste Bellot-Gurlet.
2026. ActCam: Zero-Shot Joint Camera and 3D Motion Control for Video
Generation. ACM Trans. Graph. 1, 1 (May 2026), 12 pages. 
1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
Introduction
Driven by the intrinsic ambiguities of natural language, video gen-
eration has rapidly progressed from text-guided synthesis to strong
conditioned generation pipelines [Jiang et al. 2025; Zhang et al.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.
arXiv:2605.06667v1 [cs.CV] 7 May 2026
•
O. El Khalifi, T. Rossi, O. Fossey, T. Fouque, U. Mizrahi, P. Torr, I. Laptev, F. Pizzati, and B. Bellot-Gurlet
2023], capable of accepting additional signals in the generation pro-
cess to improve fidelity to the user’s instructions. This has already
opened up possibilities for use in content production. For exam-
ple, in experimental filmmaking [Juhi Marzia 2025; Tangermann
2025], visually appealing, consistent shots of synthetic humans can
be seamlessly combined to form a short movie. However, results
are still far from perfect, mostly due to the limited control over the
stylistic characteristics of the output videos. Among other factors, in
cinematography, a compelling shot of an actor is defined not only by
what the subject does but also by how the camera moves (trajectory,
parallax, viewpoint changes). Yet, the capability of controlling both
the subject acting performance and the camera movements remains
largely unexplored in the current literature.
To mitigate this problem, a class of motion-control approaches
conditions video generation on 2D signals, typically depending on
keypoints of human bodies [Huang et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2025a].
While effective under mild viewpoint changes, such controls can
become ambiguous under moving cameras: the same 2D signal can
correspond to multiple 3D motions, and the control signal may no
longer remain consistent once the camera rotates or translates. The
closest approach enabling acting videos of humans with a moving
camera is Uni3C [Cao et al. 2025], in which 3D representations of
humans in motion are combined with camera information thanks
to a custom architecture and ad-hoc finetuning. However, we argue
that the necessity of using a specific model for generating videos
with acting and camera control is a fundamental limitation: First,
because the finetuning procedure can be expensive and limitedly
transferable to newer models using different architectures. Second,
because using a specialized model for this task, potentially combined
with other models for shots in which acting is not necessary, may
introduce stylistic inconsistencies in the resulting movie, ultimately
harming the quality of the end result. Unlike Uni3C, requiring task-
specific training, ActCam operates entirely at inference time and can
be applied to any compatible video backbone without modification.
Hence, we introduce ActCam, a zero-shot framework exploiting
only existing dense 2D conditioning mechanisms, such as depth
and human keypoints [Zhang et al. 2023], to generate videos of
acting humans with 3D camera control. We show some compelling
results of ActCam in Figure 1. Assuming as input an acting video
and the first frame of the target scenario, ActCam is able to gener-
ate multiple scenarios of the same acting, in the target scene, with
arbitrary camera movements, using a pre-trained model with no
finetuning. Our main intuition is that the main limiting factor for
this task is the current lack of a camera-aligned conditioning repre-
sentation for joint motion and camera control. ActCam addresses
this by constructing a multi-modal, camera-aligned conditioning
signal, including per-frame pose maps that encode acting motion
under the desired camera, and per-frame depth maps that provide a
coarse scene geometry proxy under the same camera. For control-
ling human motion, we benefit from 3D reconstruction of the acting
video, avoiding inconsistencies related to the 2D keypoints. For cam-
era control, instead, we benefit from depth reprojection, similarly
to related approaches [Cao et al. 2025; Ren et al. 2025]. However,
one core characteristic of ActCam is how these conditioning signals
interact. To avoid interference between static (depth) and dynamic
(human motion) elements in the scene, we remove the reference char-
acter from the scene geometry and insert the animated character
with a novel geometry-aware placement and depth alignment strat-
egy. Finally, we introduce a two-phase conditioning schedule that
exploits depth information only in early high-noise steps, while
we use only pose information in later steps. This still provides the
necessary guidance, removing artifacts due to the over-constraining
of the diffusion model with a coarse depth. With both static cameras
and dynamic cameras, ActCam outperforms the state-of-the-art
under multiple metrics on visual quality and control fidelity. Our
contributions are:
• Zero-shot joint control. We introduce ActCam, a training-
free method for joint acting-motion and camera-trajectory
control in image-conditioned video generation.
• Condition construction for joint control. We design a
novel geometry-grounded conditioning pipeline that aligns
motion (pose) and scene geometry (depth) to the target camera
while preventing static/dynamic interference via reference-
character removal, geometry-aware placement, and depth
alignment.
• Two-phase conditioning pipeline. We propose a two-phase
inference pipeline that adapts the conditioning information
depending on the denoising step, leading to a flexible condi-
tioning that preserves dynamic aspects of the scene.
Related Work
Control signals for video generation. A growing body of work
improves controllability of diffusion-based image and video genera-
tion by injecting external conditions through adapters or control
branches, and by conditioning on dense spatial signals such as edges,
depth, or semantic layouts [Guo et al. 2024, 2023; Lin et al. 2024;
Zhang et al. 2023]. These approaches show that dense conditioning
can strongly steer generative models. Some focus on motion con-
trol, either with reference videos [Ling et al. 2024; Pondaven et al.
2025; Xiao et al. 2024; Yatim et al. 2024] or with additional control
signals such as trajectories [Mou et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024; Yin
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2025b; Zhou et al. 2025a] or sparse optical
flow [Geng et al. 2025]. Some impose motion control in a zero-shot
manner, although they do not support precise camera control [Burg-
ert et al. 2025]. Pardo et al. [2025] manipulate noise at inference
time to generate videos with similar motion. However, none of those
methods solve the joint requirement of controlling an articulated
performance while enforcing a non-trivial camera trajectory.
Human-oriented video generation. Recent reference-based anima-
tion methods condition video diffusion on human-centric signals
(e.g., keypoints, pose, dense pose) to reproduce an intended perfor-
mance while preserving identity [Cheng et al. 2025; Hu et al. 2024;
Jiang et al. 2025; Tan et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2025c, 2024; Xu et al.
2025b; Zhang et al. 2025a, 2024]. Wang et al. [2025a] uses keypoints
as intermediate condition to render more realistic videos starting
from text. Xu et al. [2024] exploits dense human part masks for guid-
ing generation. All these approaches may suffer from occlusions
and perspective-induced errors. Recent efforts [Gan et al. 2025] have
also focused on increasing the length of synthesized human videos.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

ActCam: Zero-Shot Joint Camera and 3D Motion Control for Video Generation
•
Depth
2D Pose
Reference Image
Unproject
Unproject
Inpaint character
Depth
4D Motion
Camera
Rotate Right 45°
Acting Video Flow Matching process
Depth timesteps
Text Prompt
Character 3D Fitting
Pose timesteps
Control Signals
Reference Image
Input noise
VACE
Rendering
Output
Scene Transfer
Fig. 2. ActCam pipeline. Given a reference image, an acting video, and a target camera trajectory, we (1) estimate background depth from an inpainted
reference, (2) recover motion and align it to the background scene via fitting, and (3) rasterize pose and depth+pose control signals under the target viewpoint.
A two-phase denoising schedule conditions early steps on depth+pose for stronger camera control, then refines with pose-only to encourage motion adherence.
Differently, some use reconstructed 3D humans to condition video
generation [Liang et al. 2025; Zhu et al. 2024], although they offer
no camera control. Similarly, Kulal et al. [2023] insert humans into
scenes by inferring affordance-aware poses, but without motion or
camera control. Our proposal, instead, offers unified camera control
and human motion conditioning by exploiting 3D humans.
Camera control and joint camera-motion control. There is an in-
terest in controlling camera trajectories in generated videos. A first
line of work exploits Plucker embeddings and additional trained
branches to enforce camera control [Bahmani et al. 2025a,b; He et al.
2025; Kuang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2025a]. Alternatively, camera tra-
jectories can be enforced by geometry-aware conditions that convey
viewpoint changes more directly [Hou and Chen 2024; Meng et al.
2025; Ren et al. 2025]. These systems do not allow for joint human
and camera conditioning simultaneously. Concurrently, Pulp Mo-
tion [Courant et al. 2026] generates camera trajectories and human
motions, but focuses on trajectory generation rather than video
synthesis. The closest work to ours is Uni3C [Cao et al. 2025], that
allows joint camera and human motion control. However, it relies on
additional training/finetuning to unify camera and motion control.
In contrast, ActCam outperforms Uni3C exploiting joint control
by constructing camera-aligned pose and depth conditions from a
reference image, an acting video, and a camera preset.
Method
3.1
Problem setup
Inputs and goals. We study image-conditioned video generation
with joint control over the character’s motion and the camera tra-
jectory, using a pretrained conditioned video diffusion backbone.
We assume a sequence length 𝑇and three inputs: a reference im-
age 𝐼ref ∈R𝐻×𝑊×3 defining the target character identity and the
environment appearance, an acting video 𝑉act = {𝐼act
𝜏}𝑇
𝜏=1 provid-
ing the target performance, and a target per-frame camera trajec-
tory C = {(𝐾𝜏, 𝑅𝜏, t𝜏)}𝑇
𝜏=1, with intrinsics 𝐾𝜏∈R3×3 and extrinsics
(𝑅𝜏, t𝜏) ∈𝑆𝑂(3) × R3. Let 𝑉= {𝐼𝜏}𝑇
𝜏=1 be the generated video. Our
goal is to generate 𝑉such that the identity and appearance match
𝐼ref, the motion in the output video matches the performance in 𝑉act,
and finally, such that each frame’s viewpoint is in accordance with
the desired camera parameters C.
Formalisation of the setup. We formalize the pretrained VACE [Jiang
et al. 2025] model as a mapping 𝑓: ℭ→V that transforms
a set of dense video-aligned signals 𝐶into a video sequence 𝑉.
VACE is trained on a video dataset combining various video-aligned
conditions such as: depth, optical flow, character poses, and ac-
tivation masks. We restrict the conditioning input to the tuple
𝐶= (𝐼ref,𝑐pose+depth,𝑐pose). Our objective is to synthesize novel,
geometrically consistent dense conditions 𝑐pose and 𝑐depth derived
jointly from the acting video 𝑉act and the target camera C, such
that the generated video 𝑉= 𝑓(𝐶) satisfies the desired motion and
trajectory constraints. ActCam is a pure inference-time method: we
keep the backbone fixed and design conditioning signals that jointly
encode motion and camera.
Continuous flow formulation. Let 𝑧𝑡denote the latent video state
at continuous time 𝑡∈[0, 1] and let 𝐶denote the conditioning
input. We model the generative dynamics as a flow governed by
an ordinary differential equation (ODE). The backbone network 𝑣𝜃
approximates the instantaneous velocity field, defining the temporal
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.
•
O. El Khalifi, T. Rossi, O. Fossey, T. Fouque, U. Mizrahi, P. Torr, I. Laptev, F. Pizzati, and B. Bellot-Gurlet
evolution of the latent state as
d𝑧𝑡
d𝑡= 𝑣𝜃(𝑧𝑡,𝑡,𝐶).
(1)
The target latent 𝑧1 is obtained by integrating this flow over time
from 𝑧0 ∼N (0, 1) and is subsequently decoded into the video 𝑉.
Conditioning Requirements for Camera-Aligned Motion Control.
To jointly ensure camera control and pose reproduction, the condi-
tioning must provide spatially grounded, per-frame cues in the target
camera view: it must both enforce the intended motion and stabilize
the scene layout under viewpoint changes. To enforce camera con-
trol, we preferred a dense per frame aligned depth signal making
sure the model understands the 3D geometry and camera motion
rather than numerical camera control using Plücker rays since dense
superiority has been proven in [Ren et al. 2025]. In practice, simply
combining off-the-shelf controls is brittle: view-locked motion cues
(e.g., 2D keypoints) become ambiguous under camera motion, and
conditioning on depth estimated from 𝐼ref entangles the static ref-
erence character with the dynamic character we want to animate,
which can cause duplicated characters, freezing, or violations of
motion/camera constraints. ActCam addresses this by constructing
camera-aligned pose/depth conditions and by using a two-phase
conditioning schedule (Sections 3.2-3.3).
3.2
Camera-aligned condition construction
Intuition. Our goal is to provide the diffusion model with a target-
view-aligned condition that jointly encodes character motion and
camera motion. To this end, we leverage depth as a geometric prior:
once rasterized under the target camera trajectory, the depth signal
implicitly conveys viewpoint changes as apparent background mo-
tion. However, naively using the reference image depth introduces
a static character that conflicts with the dynamic pose signal (see
Figure 2). We address this by inpainting the character out of the
reference image and estimating a background-only depth map Dbg.
ActCam then constructs a unified 3D scene from Dbg and the recov-
ered poses, from which we rasterize two control signals under the
target camera: a depth+pose condition and a pose-only condition
obtained by omitting the depth.
Camera motion and 3D anchor. In order to provide a 3D anchor to
VACE, we construct a 3D background environment which we argue,
once rasterized, will provide enough information to the model to
effectively encode the camera motion as an equivalent background
motion, and disentangle the character motion from camera motion,
reducing conflicts between the two signals. We estimate a depth
map 𝐷ref from 𝐼ref using a monocular depth estimator (MoGe [Wang
et al. 2025b]). This leads to the creation of a 3D mesh that can be
rendered from different viewpoints. Mesh-based rendering provides
stronger geometric consistency than point clouds, which tend to
exhibit sparsity and visual artifacts under camera motion.
Nonetheless, solely relying on the reference image depth proves
insufficient. Indeed, the presence of a static character in the 3D
mesh provides a conflicting signal when rendered with a dynamic
pose control signal, as in Figure 2. To tackle this, we propose to
inpaint the character out of the reference image 𝐼ref to extract a
background-only depth map Dbg, yielding a background 3D mesh,
suppressing depth-static character related issues, such as character
duplication in the output video.
Also, since VACE relies on dense conditioning, enforcing strict
pixel correspondence between the control signals and the generated
video is crucial. A key challenge is the alignment of the dynamic
actor pose with the background 3D scene geometry. In practice,
the reference depth map Dref and the background depth map Dbg
are estimated in two independent passes, leading to inconsistencies
in 3D space. To resolve this discrepancy, we estimate a geometric
alignment allowing the character to be correctly registered within
the background 3D mesh. We refer to this stage as the scene transfer,
described in the next paragraph, and visible in Figure 2.
Scene transfer. Let M ⊂⟦1, 𝐻⟧× ⟦1,𝑊⟧denote the binary char-
acter segmentation mask in Iref, obtained using [Liu et al. 2024].
Our goal is to find the new position of the reference character when
transferred into the 3D background mesh, while preserving pixel
reprojection with Iref; therefore, only the depth of the character
points is adjusted, since its scale and image plane coordinates will be
imposed. We exploit the set of non-inpainted pixels (𝑢, 𝑣) ∉M, for
which reliable correspondences exist between the two depth maps.
Let xref
𝑢,𝑣∈R3 and xbg
𝑢,𝑣∈R3 denote the 3D points reconstructed
from Dref and Dbg, respectively. To emphasize constraints near
the character boundary, we assign each an importance weight: not
all environment points contribute equally to the scene transfer, as
points closer to the character are more informative for rendering
correct scene interactions. We assign higher weight to closer points:
𝑤(𝑢, 𝑣) = exp

−dist(xref
𝑢,𝑣, M)

,
(2)
where dist(·, M) denotes the Euclidean distance in the image plane
to the closest pixel in the mask M. We then compute the weighted
centroids of the character relative to each set of points in Dref and
Dbg respectively:
pref =
Í
(𝑢,𝑣)∉M 𝑤(𝑢, 𝑣) xref
𝑢,𝑣
Í
(𝑢,𝑣)∉M 𝑤(𝑢, 𝑣)
,
pbg =
Í
(𝑢,𝑣)∉M 𝑤(𝑢, 𝑣) xbg
𝑢,𝑣
Í
(𝑢,𝑣)∉M 𝑤(𝑢, 𝑣)
.
(3)
Assuming that the relative position of the character with respect to
these centroids is preserved up to a global depth scaling, we align
the character by applying an affine transformation along the depth
axis. For any character point with reference depth 𝑧char
ref , the aligned
depth in the background coordinate system is given by
𝑧char
bg
=  𝑧char
ref −𝑝𝑧
ref
 𝑝𝑧
bg
𝑝𝑧
ref
+ 𝑝𝑧
bg,
(4)
where 𝑝𝑧
ref and 𝑝𝑧
bg denote the𝑧-coordinates of pref and pbg, respec-
tively. This transformation jointly accounts for scale and translation
mismatches, enabling consistent addition of the character points
to the background 3D scene, while effectively taking character-
environment proximities (e.g. contacts) into account via the impor-
tance weighting.
4D motion recovery (acting). We recover a motion sequence of 3D
humans from 𝑉act using a monocular 3D human motion estimator
(GVHMR [Chu et al. 2024]). We denote the recovered articulated
state at frame 𝜏as S𝜏(e.g., SMPL parameters and root pose). Unlike
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

ActCam: Zero-Shot Joint Camera and 3D Motion Control for Video Generation
•
2D keypoints, {S𝜏} reduces depth ambiguity and provides a stable
motion signal under viewpoint changes.
Character 3D fitting. As in [Cao et al. 2025], we align the dynamic
poses S with the actual replaced character in the assembled back-
ground 3D scene (see Figure 2). To that extent, we adopt the same
approach as in [Cao et al. 2025] using a least squares estimation
based on rigid transformation at time 𝜏= 0 between the S0 and
the extracted keypoints from 𝐼ref. This method [Umeyama 1991]
provides a rotation matrix 𝑅∈𝑆𝑂(3), a translation ˆ𝑡∈R3 and a
scale 𝑠that we will apply to the pose sequence as follows:
ˆS𝜏= 𝑠.𝑅S𝜏+ ˆ𝑡
This new sequence ˆS𝜏is the one being rendered.
Rendering control signals. VACE control signal is a dense, image-
like representation that can be directly processed by standard video
encoders. We thus directly rasterize both the pose and the depth+pose
control signals as videos. We denote R C the rasterization operator
under the camera C. For the pose, we rasterize the animated skele-
ton ˆS𝜏following the standard openpose representation in other
works (see [Jiang et al. 2025; Zhang et al. 2025a]) encoding 2D joint
locations and limb connectivity. This yields a pose control video
𝑐pose = R C( ˆS𝜏) ∈R𝑇×𝐻×𝑊×3, rendered on a black background, fol-
lowing the target camera viewpoint (see Figure 2). For the depth+pose
control signal, we simply render the background 3D mesh built from
Dbg using min-max depth normalized grayscale color values, fol-
lowing the format that VACE uses at train time. To obtain actual
depth+pose joint signal, we finally superimpose the previously ren-
dered pose signal with the background depth rasterization to obtain
𝑐pose+depth = R C( ˆS𝜏, Dbg) ∈R𝑇×𝐻×𝑊×3.
3.3
Two-phase conditioning
Monocular depth estimates are often coarse and locally inaccurate.
Conditioning solely on actor poses fails to capture camera motion, as
the model interprets such motion as part of the body rather than the
camera. On the other hand, conditioning on both depth and poses
throughout all denoising steps can over-constrain the generation,
leading to static backgrounds and the propagation of depth artifacts
into high-frequency details (see Ablation, 5). To address this, we
adopt a two-phase conditioning schedule that gradually relaxes
depth conditioning.
Let 𝑡denote the diffusion timestep. We define the conditioning
signal 𝑐(𝑡)𝜏using a cutoff threshold 𝑡stop:
𝑐(𝑡)𝜏=
(
R C𝜏( ˆS𝜏, Dbg),
if 𝑡≤𝑡stop,
R C𝜏( ˆS𝜏),
if 𝑡> 𝑡stop.
(5)
The pose signal is derived from 3D motion recovery and target-
camera alignment, and provides a stable motion constraint. We
therefore keep pose conditioning throughout the full denoising
process.
Experiments
4.1
Setup
We evaluate ActCam having an image 𝐼ref, an acting video 𝑉act, and
optionally a target per-frame camera trajectory as inputs. We adopt
VACE [Jiang et al. 2025] as backbone. We set the same resolution
(𝐻×𝑊), number of steps (𝑁), and scheduler across methods.
Datasets. For moving camera, we design an evaluation inspired
by Uni3C [Cao et al. 2025]. We select 4 camera presets with com-
mon cinematic motions and evaluate on 100 reference clips from
RealisDance-Val [Zhou et al. 2025b] per preset (total 4×100 tests).
For each clip, we sample a reference 𝐼ref, extract an acting-motion
signal from the original clip, and generate a new video under one of
the 4 camera presets. For baselines, we input the same setup, mean-
ing same 𝐼ref, extracted motion, camera preset. For static cameras,
we use RealisDance-Val [Zhou et al. 2025b] under fixed viewpoint.
Baselines. For moving camera, we compare with Uni3C [Cao et al.
2025], the most similar method in literature. Both ActCam and Uni3C
are based on the same Wan 2.1 14B backbone, ensuring a fair com-
parison. We also test ActCam in a static camera setup by comparing
against strong motion control methods without explicit camera con-
trol: Moore-AnimateAnyone [Hu et al. 2024], HumanVid [Wang
et al. 2024], MimicMotion [Zhang et al. 2024], Animate-X [Tan et al.
2024], Hyper-Motion [Xu et al. 2025b], UniAnimate-DiT [Wang
et al. 2025c], VACE [Jiang et al. 2025], Wan-Animate [Cheng et al.
2025], and SteadyDancer [Zhang et al. 2025a]. We intentionally do
not compare to camera-control-only methods, as our goal is joint
control with motion.
Metrics. We follow Uni3C [Cao et al. 2025] for the evaluation
protocol. First, we use VBench [Huang et al. 2024a] for evaluat-
ing the visual quality of the generated videos. We evaluate Subject
Consistency (SC), Background Consistency (BC), Appearance Fi-
delity (AF), Imaging Quality (IQ), Temporal Consistency (TC) and
Motion Smoothness (MS), all higher is better. This quantifies quality-
oriented generation capabilities. We also calculate the Mean Per
Joint Error (MPJPE) between the estimated 3D humans in the act-
ing video and in the generated one, to assess the quality of the
joint camera and motion control. We evaluate the Sampson Er-
ror (SE) [Sampson 1982] for geometric consistency in presence of
moving camera. We also report the 3D Consistency (3D-C) and Ob-
ject Control (OC) scores from WorldScore [Chen et al. 2025]: 3D-C
measures multi-view coherence of the generated scene, while OC
quantifies the fidelity of object appearance across frames. In the
comparison against methods with no camera control, we evaluate
only motion quality with VBench metrics.
4.2
Quantitative evaluation
4.2.1
Joint camera and motion control. We now present our main
results. From Table 1, ActCam achieves higher quality/consistency
scores than Uni3C and reduces motion/geometry errors under con-
trolled camera trajectories. ActCam outperforms Uni3C in MPJPE
(0.2087 vs 0.2121) and SE (0.4546 vs 0.5665), showcasing the supe-
rior potential of our conditioning mechanism for the moving camera
and character. Interestingly, we also outperform Uni3C in the ma-
jority of VBench metrics, reporting significant improvements, espe-
cially in Subject Consistency (0.9212) and Imaging Quality (0.7212).
In our zero-shot setup, we avoid loss of performance due to finetun-
ing on restricted ad-hoc data for motion control. We propose also a
qualitative comparison with Uni3C in Figure 9.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.
•
O. El Khalifi, T. Rossi, O. Fossey, T. Fouque, U. Mizrahi, P. Torr, I. Laptev, F. Pizzati, and B. Bellot-Gurlet
Table 1. Joint camera and character control. We evaluate against Uni3C both on VBench, focusing on generation quality, and assessing control quality
(MPJPE) and geometric consistency (SE). We also use WorldScore [Chen et al. 2025] to evaluate the 3D consistency (3D-C) and object control (OC) of the
generations. We outperform in all cases Uni3C, the closest baseline in our setup.
Model
VBench Average↑
SC↑
BC↑
AF↑
IQ↑
TC↑
MS↑
MPJPE↓
SE↓
3D-C↑
OC↑
Uni3C [Cao et al. 2025]
0.8370
0.9084
0.9380
0.5688
0.6640
0.9607
0.9821
0.2121
0.5665
0.539
0.9878
ActCam (Ours)
0.8497
0.9212
0.9350
0.5767
0.7212
0.9571
0.9872
0.2087
0.4546
0.6304
0.9953
Table 2. Static camera comparison. We evaluate on RealisDance-Val [Zhou et al. 2025b] with a static camera using VBench [Huang et al. 2024a,b]. The
improved performance of ActCam compared to alternatives using 2D keypoints as conditions advocates for the superiority of our 3D-based pipeline.
Model
Average↑
SC↑
BC↑
AF↑
IQ↑
TC↑
MS↑
Moore-AnimateAnyone [Hu et al. 2024]
83.78
94.65
94.90
51.56
66.34
97.16
98.07
HumanVid [Wang et al. 2024]
84.68
93.69
94.94
55.58
67.45
97.87
98.52
MimicMotion [Zhang et al. 2024]
82.27
92.21
93.60
52.09
59.67
97.46
98.61
Animate-X [Tan et al. 2024]
82.93
93.39
95.11
51.72
60.91
97.79
98.68
Hyper-Motion [Xu et al. 2025b]
84.04
93.58
94.97
52.97
65.52
98.19
99.01
UniAnimate-DiT [Wang et al. 2025c]
84.29
94.56
95.44
52.18
65.52
98.78
99.24
VACE [Jiang et al. 2025]
85.33
93.56
95.03
57.81
70.61
96.74
98.25
Wan-Animate [Cheng et al. 2025]
84.38
93.06
94.52
54.47
66.87
98.42
98.96
SteadyDancer [Zhang et al. 2025a]
85.15
93.48
95.18
56.80
68.45
97.99
99.02
ActCam (Ours)
86.47
95.28
95.83
58.66
70.83
98.88
99.34
User evaluation. As a further comparison on joint motion and
camera control, we use a two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) study
on 17 users with anonymized video pairs comparing ActCam against
Uni3C. We use videos generating the same 4 camera presets as in
Table 1, and a small subset of RealisDance-Val clips. Each trial shows
two generated videos conditioned on the same inputs, alongside
the reference acting video and a textual description of the camera
motion. Participants then reply to questions evaluating: (1) Cam-
era adherence: "Which video better follows the specified camera
motion (viewpoint changes and stable background/parallax)?", (2)
Motion faithfulness: "Which video better matches the motion in
the reference acting video (pose accuracy and smoothness)?", and
(3) Visual quality: "Which video looks more visually realistic and
pleasing overall (fewer artifacts and less flicker)?". We report the
results in Figure 3. As visible, we considerably outperform Uni3C
in all questions, strongly suggesting that the user preference for
Camera
Motion
Video
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Preference
Ours
Uni3C
Tie
Fig. 3. User study. We compare with Uni3C on camera adherence (Camera)
and motion faithfulness (Motion) with respect to the conditioning input,
alongside overall visual quality (Visual). We considerably outperform Uni3C,
the closest method to ours.
generated videos are aligned with the performance boost reported
in Table 1.
4.2.2
Motion control with static camera. We now compare against
previous methods for motion control, isolating the quality of our 3D
human-based motion conditioning. In Table 2, we show VBench met-
rics on RealisDance-Val. For fairness with others, we assume a static
camera, and render only videos of characters in motion following
the reference acting video. ActCam is consistently better than strong
baselines in this setting, improving subject/background consistency
and temporal/motion metrics while maintaining high imaging qual-
ity. For example, ActCam improves TC from 98.78 (UniAnimate-DiT,
second best) to 98.88 and AF from 57.81 (VACE, second best) to 58.66,
while also improving IQ from 70.61 (VACE, second best) to 70.83. We
attribute this result to the structural characteristics of our 3D-based
conditioning: while methods based on 2D keypoints are subject
to bone deformation and occlusion issues, exploiting a 3D signal
regularizes subject proportions across the video.
4.3
Qualitative evaluation
We now report qualitative results. Besides the reported frames, we
strongly suggest to visualize the supplementary video. We include
multiple results showcasing the different degrees of control of Act-
Cam. In Figure 10, we illustrate how we can render different cam-
eras for the same scene. Those scenarios prove the flexibility of
our method across scenes, characters, and reference motion. In Fig-
ure 11, we show how the same motion with the same camera can
be rendered on different scenes. In Figure 12, we include a camera
variation, showing that even complex motion is preserved across
scenarios. Moreover, our method is adaptable to multi-character
scenarios if the backbone supports it, as shown in Figure 13.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

ActCam: Zero-Shot Joint Camera and 3D Motion Control for Video Generation
•
0 0.1
0.2
1.0
0.8
0.81
0.82
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.86
Normalized Timesteps ND
Average (VBench)
Fig. 4. Effect of 𝑁𝐷on VBench score. The figure shows the average
VBench scores as a function of 𝑁𝐷, where the conditioning switches from
pose+depth to pose-only. Early switching under-constrains the genera-
tion, while late switching (low 𝑡) can propagate depth artifacts into high-
frequency details, harming results. We set an optimal 𝑁𝐷= 0.2.
Depth Map
Without Condition 
Schedule
With Condition 
Schedule
Fig. 5. Importance of conditioning schedule. Excessive depth guidance
(setting 𝑁𝐷= 1) can overly constrain the scene, producing static back-
grounds under camera motion (center, red circle). Instead, 𝑁𝐷< 1 allows
to flexibly move the barbell to follow the human motion (right).
4.4
Ablation studies
Balance of depth conditioning. We vary the number of initial dif-
fusion steps conditioned on both pose and depth (𝑁𝐷) and observe
a trade-off. This is reflected in VBench metrics reported in Fig-
ure 4. We select a canonical 𝑁𝐷that balances these effects; unless
stated otherwise, we use 𝑁𝐷= 0.2𝑁(e.g., 𝑁𝐷=2 when 𝑁=10). From
our evaluation, introducing 𝑁𝐷denoising iterations with depth
conditioning improves environment/camera stability, improving
VBench-based evaluations. However, setting 𝑁𝐷too high can over-
constrain late-stage refinement, as we show in Figure 5. In there we
set 𝑁𝐷= 1, resulting in guidance on depth for all diffusion steps. As
visible, in presence of dynamic elements or interacting objects, the
rigid depth conditioning prevents motion, limiting the realism of the
output scene. On the contrary, not benefiting from depth condition-
ing (𝑁𝐷= 0) results in ambiguities between character and camera
motion, as we demonstrate in Figure 6. There, providing only pose
information results in a moving character on a fixed background,
failing to capture adequately the camera motion.
Reference character removal. As described in Sec. 3.2, we remove
the static reference character from the reconstructed scene depth
before inserting the animated character. Without this step, the static
geometry of the reference character interferes with the dynamic
motion conditioning in the depth map, often leading to duplicated
characters. Figure 7 shows a representative example: the static char-
acter imprint in the depth signal interferes with the animated actor,
yielding duplication and inconsistent compositing. This proves the
importance of our design decision based on character inpainting.
Pose 
conditioning
Depth + Pose 
conditioning
Fig. 6. Importance of depth. Providing only pose information (𝑁𝐷= 0,
top) for conditioning creates ambiguities between camera and character
motion. Conversely, using depth yields the correct character and camera
motions (𝑁𝐷= 0.2, bottom).
No removal
With removal
Fig. 7. Character removal. Without removal, the reference character is
captured in the depth map, yielding duplicate subjects.
Input image depth
Side-view
No
alignment
Uniform
weighting
Importance
weighting (ours)
Fig. 8. Importance of scene transfer. Without scene transfer (No align-
ment), the condition does not respect 3D coherence. Uniform weighting
improves placement but importance weighting (ours) is required to achieve
best results. The red arrows (right column) show depth/positions offsets.
Scene transfer. In Section 3.2, we describe how we align the com-
posed character depth with the rendered environment depth to stabi-
lize occlusions and prevent depth-inconsistent decomposition under
difficult motions or camera changes. Without alignment, reusing
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.
•
O. El Khalifi, T. Rossi, O. Fossey, T. Fouque, U. Mizrahi, P. Torr, I. Laptev, F. Pizzati, and B. Bellot-Gurlet
the first-frame depth map can produce implausible occlusions and
unstable layout when the scene contains strong depth variation or
large viewpoint change. Figure 8 illustrates that depth alignment
improves occlusion ordering and reduces layout/tearing artifacts
around the actor during strong viewpoint changes. Our importance
weighting produces depth-faithful placements, as shown in Figure 8.
Conclusion
We presented ActCam, a zero-shot method for joint camera and
motion control in image-conditioned video generation. ActCam con-
structs camera-aligned conditioning cues from a reference image, an
acting video, and a target camera preset by combining target-view
pose control with target-view depth-based scene guidance, while
preventing static/dynamic interference through reference charac-
ter removal, geometry-aware placement, and depth alignment. To
mitigate depth-induced artifacts, we introduced a two-phase condi-
tioning schedule that uses depth only in early denoising steps to lock
global structure and viewpoint changes, then relies on pose-only
control for high-frequency refinement. Experiments on both static
cameras and moving camera benchmarks assess the capabilities of
ActCam to render high-quality videos of humans in motion. We also
provided ablations and failure cases to clarify the contribution of
each design choice and the remaining limitations.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

ActCam: Zero-Shot Joint Camera and 3D Motion Control for Video Generation
•
Camera
First frame
Outputs
Uni3C
ActCam
Uni3C
ActCam
Uni3C
ActCam
Fig. 9. Comparison with Uni3C. Uni3C yields suboptimal camera control (top, middle) and unrealistic character motion (bottom). In the insets, a visualization
of the control signal for both Uni3C and ActCam.
Fig. 10. Different cameras. We first show the conditioning signal and ActCam results (top two rows). In the next three rows, we variate camera movements.
As visible, the character appearance and motion remain consistent.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.
•
O. El Khalifi, T. Rossi, O. Fossey, T. Fouque, U. Mizrahi, P. Torr, I. Laptev, F. Pizzati, and B. Bellot-Gurlet
Fig. 11. Different scenes. We display two outputs of ActCam showing the same motion rendered on two characters in different scenes, using the same
camera controls.
Fig. 12. Different scenes and different cameras. To show the flexibility of our approach, we apply the same motion to two characters in different scenes, by
also varying the camera control. ActCam still renders the correct motion.
Conditioning
Output
Conditioning
Output
Fig. 13. Multi-character results. ActCam handles multiple characters by applying the scene transfer and motion fitting independently per character.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

ActCam: Zero-Shot Joint Camera and 3D Motion Control for Video Generation
•
References
Sherwin Bahmani, Ivan Skorokhodov, Guocheng Qian, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi
Menapace, Andrea Tagliasacchi, David B Lindell, and Sergey Tulyakov. 2025a. Ac3d:
Analyzing and improving 3d camera control in video diffusion transformers. In
CVPR.
Sherwin Bahmani, Ivan Skorokhodov, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi Menapace, Guocheng
Qian, Michael Vasilkovsky, Hsin-Ying Lee, Chaoyang Wang, Jiaxu Zou, Andrea
Tagliasacchi, et al. 2025b. Vd3d: Taming large video diffusion transformers for 3d
camera control. In ICLR.
Ryan Burgert, Yuancheng Xu, Wenqi Xian, Oliver Pilarski, Pascal Clausen, Mingming
He, Li Ma, Yitong Deng, Lingxiao Li, Mohsen Mousavi, et al. 2025. Go-with-the-flow:
Motion-controllable video diffusion models using real-time warped noise. In CVPR.
Chenjie Cao, Jingkai Zhou, Shikai Li, Jingyun Liang, Chaohui Yu, Fan Wang, Yanwei
Fu, and Xiangyang Xue. 2025. Uni3C: Unifying Precisely 3D-Enhanced Camera and
Human Motion Controls for Video Generation. arXiv (2025).
Handi Chen, Hongming Zhang, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, and Min Lin. 2025. WorldScore:
A Unified Evaluation Benchmark for World Generation. In IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
Gang Cheng, Xin Gao, Li Hu, Siqi Hu, Mingyang Huang, Chaonan Ji, Ju Li, Dechao
Meng, Jinwei Qi, Penchong Qiao, Zhen Shen, Yafei Song, Ke Sun, Linrui Tian, Feng
Wang, Guangyuan Wang, Qi Wang, Zhongjian Wang, Jiayu Xiao, Sheng Xu, Bang
Zhang, Peng Zhang, et al. 2025. Wan-Animate: Unified Character Animation and
Replacement with Holistic Replication. arXiv (2025).
Honglin Chu et al. 2024. GVHMR: Human Motion Recovery via Gravity-View Coordi-
nates. In SIGGRAPH Asia.
Robin Courant, David Loiseaux, Xi Wang, Marc Christie, and Vicky Kalogeiton. 2026.
Pulp Motion: Framing-aware multimodal camera and human motion generation. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Qijun Gan, Yi Ren, Chen Zhang, Zhenhui Ye, Pan Xie, Xiang Yin, Zehuan Yuan, Bingyue
Peng, and Jianke Zhu. 2025. Humandit: Pose-guided diffusion transformer for long-
form human motion video generation. arXiv (2025).
Daniel Geng, Charles Herrmann, Junhwa Hur, Forrester Cole, Serena Zhang, Tobias
Pfaff, Tatiana Lopez-Guevara, Yusuf Aytar, Michael Rubinstein, Chen Sun, et al. 2025.
Motion prompting: Controlling video generation with motion trajectories. In CVPR.
Xun Guo, Mingwu Zheng, Liang Hou, Yuan Gao, Yufan Deng, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang,
Yufan Liu, Weiming Hu, Zhengjun Zha, et al. 2024. I2v-adapter: A general image-to-
video adapter for diffusion models. In SIGGRAPH.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh
Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. 2023. AnimateDiff: Animate Your Personalized
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models without Specific Tuning. In ICLR.
Hao He, Yinghao Xu, Yuwei Guo, Gordon Wetzstein, Bo Dai, Hongsheng Li, and Ceyuan
Yang. 2025. Cameractrl: Enabling camera control for text-to-video generation. In
ICLR.
Chen Hou and Zhibo Chen. 2024. Training-free camera control for video generation.
arXiv (2024).
Li Hu, Xin Gao, Peng Zhang, Ke Sun, Bang Zhang, Liefeng Bo, et al. 2024. Animate Any-
one: Consistent and Controllable Image-to-Video Synthesis for Character Animation.
In CVPR.
Hsin-Ping Huang, Yang Zhou, Jui-Hsien Wang, Difan Liu, Feng Liu, Ming-Hsuan Yang,
and Zhan Xu. 2025. Move-in-2d: 2d-conditioned human motion generation. In
CVPR.
Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan
Zhang, Tianxing Wu, Qingyang Jin, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan
Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. 2024a. VBench: Compre-
hensive Benchmark Suite for Video Generative Models. In CVPR.
Ziqi Huang, Fan Zhang, Xiaojie Xu, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Ziyue Dong, Qianli Ma,
Nattapol Chanpaisit, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen,
Ying-Cong Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. 2024b. VBench++:
Comprehensive and Versatile Benchmark Suite for Video Generative Models. arXiv
(2024).
Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Chaojie Mao, Jingfeng Zhang, Yulin Pan, Yu Liu, et al. 2025.
VACE: All-in-One Video Creation and Editing. arXiv (2025).
Juhi Marzia. 2025.
"Only Gets Better Here": Elon Musk Reacts to AI-Generated
Short Film Harry Potter Set in Vietnam War Going Viral.
Sportskeeda.

musk-reacts-ai-generated-short-film-harry-potter-set-vietnam-war-goes-viral
Accessed: 2026-01-22.
Zhengfei Kuang, Shengqu Cai, Hao He, Yinghao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Leonidas J Guibas,
and Gordon Wetzstein. 2024. Collaborative video diffusion: Consistent multi-video
generation with camera control. NeurIPS (2024).
Sumith Kulal, Tim Brooks, Alex Aiken, Jiajun Wu, Jimei Yang, Jingwan Lu, Alexei A.
Efros, and Krishna Kumar Singh. 2023. Putting People in Their Place: Affordance-
Aware Human Insertion into Scenes. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Jingyun Liang, Jingkai Zhou, Shikai Li, Chenjie Cao, Lei Sun, Yichen Qian, Weihua
Chen, and Fan Wang. 2025. Realismotion: Decomposed human motion control and
video generation in the world space. arXiv (2025).
Han Lin, Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. 2024. Ctrl-adapter: An efficient
and versatile framework for adapting diverse controls to any diffusion model. arXiv
(2024).
Pengyang Ling, Jiazi Bu, Pan Zhang, Xiaoyi Dong, Yuhang Zang, Tong Wu, Huaian
Chen, Jiaqi Wang, and Yi Jin. 2024. Motionclone: Training-free motion cloning for
controllable video generation. arXiv (2024).
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang,
Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al. 2024. Grounding dino: Marrying dino
with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In ECCV.
YOU Meng, Zhiyu Zhu, LIU Hui, and Junhui Hou. 2025. NVS-Solver: Video Diffusion
Model as Zero-Shot Novel View Synthesizer. In ICLR.
Chong Mou, Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhaoyang Zhang, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang.
2024. Revideo: Remake a video with motion and content control. NeurIPS (2024).
Alejandro Pardo, Fabio Pizzati, Tong Zhang, Alexander Pondaven, Philip Torr,
Juan Camilo Perez, and Bernard Ghanem. 2025. MatchDiffusion: Training-free
Generation of Match-cuts. In ICCV.
Alexander Pondaven, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Sergey Tulyakov, Philip Torr, and Fabio
Pizzati. 2025. Video motion transfer with diffusion transformers. In CVPR.
Xuanchi Ren, Tianchang Shen, Jiahui Huang, Huan Ling, Yifan Lu, Merlin Nimier-
David, Thomas Müller, Alexander Keller, Sanja Fidler, and Jun Gao. 2025. GEN3C:
3D-Informed World-Consistent Video Generation with Precise Camera Control. In
CVPR.
Paul D Sampson. 1982. Fitting conic sections to "very scattered" data: An iterative
refinement of the Bookstein algorithm. Computer graphics and image processing
(1982).
Shuai Tan, Biao Gong, Xiang Wang, Shiwei Zhang, Dandan Zheng, Ruobing Zheng,
Kecheng Zheng, Jingdong Chen, Ming Yang, et al. 2024. Animate-X: Universal
Character Image Animation with Enhanced Motion Representation. In ICLR.
Victor Tangermann. 2025. OpenAI Says It’s Making a Full Hollywood Movie Using AI.
 Accessed: 2026-01-22.
S. Umeyama. 1991. Least-squares estimation of transformation parameters between
two point patterns. IEEE T-PAMI (1991).
Boyuan Wang, Xiaofeng Wang, Chaojun Ni, Guosheng Zhao, Zhiqin Yang, Zheng
Zhu, Muyang Zhang, Yukun Zhou, Xinze Chen, Guan Huang, et al. 2025a. Human-
Dreamer: Generating Controllable Human-Motion Videos via Decoupled Generation.
In CVPR.
Ruicheng Wang, Sicheng Xu, Cassie Dai, Jianfeng Xiang, Yu Deng, Xin Tong, Jiaolong
Yang, et al. 2025b. MoGe: Unlocking Accurate Monocular Geometry Estimation for
Open-Domain Images with Optimal Training Supervision. In CVPR.
Xiang Wang, Shiwei Zhang, Longxiang Tang, Yingya Zhang, Changxin Gao, Yuehuan
Wang, Nong Sang, et al. 2025c. UniAnimate-DiT: Human Image Animation with
Large-Scale Video Diffusion Transformer. arXiv (2025).
Zhenzhi Wang, Yixuan Li, Yanhong Zeng, Youqing Fang, Yuwei Guo, Wenran Liu, Jing
Tan, Kai Chen, Tianfan Xue, Bo Dai, Dahua Lin, et al. 2024. HumanVid: Demystifying
Training Data for Camera-controllable Human Image Animation. In NeurIPS.
Weijia Wu, Zhuang Li, Yuchao Gu, Rui Zhao, Yefei He, David Junhao Zhang, Mike Zheng
Shou, Yan Li, Tingting Gao, and Di Zhang. 2024. Draganything: Motion control for
anything using entity representation. In ECCV.
Zeqi Xiao, Yifan Zhou, Shuai Yang, and Xingang Pan. 2024. Video diffusion models are
training-free motion interpreter and controller. NeurIPS (2024).
Dejia Xu, Weili Nie, Chao Liu, Sifei Liu, Jan Kautz, Zhangyang Wang, and Arash Vahdat.
2025a. Camco: Camera-controllable 3d-consistent image-to-video generation. In
ICLR.
Shuolin Xu, Siming Zheng, Ziyi Wang, H. C. Yu, Jinwei Chen, Huaqi Zhang, Bo Li,
Peng-Tao Jiang, et al. 2025b. HyperMotion: DiT-Based Pose-Guided Human Image
Animation of Complex Motions. arXiv (2025).
Zhongcong Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Jia-Wei Liu, Chenxu Zhang,
Jiashi Feng, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2024. Magicanimate: Temporally consistent
human image animation using diffusion model. In CVPR.
Danah Yatim, Rafail Fridman, Omer Bar-Tal, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. 2024. Space-
time diffusion features for zero-shot text-driven motion transfer. In CVPR.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Jie Shi, Houqiang Li, Gong Ming, and Nan
Duan. 2023. Dragnuwa: Fine-grained control in video generation by integrating
text, image, and trajectory. arXiv (2023).
Jiaming Zhang, Shengming Cao, Rui Li, Xiaotong Zhao, Yutao Cui, Xinglin Hou, Gang-
shan Wu, Haolan Chen, Yu Xu, Limin Wang, Kai Ma, et al. 2025a. SteadyDancer:
Harmonized and Coherent Human Image Animation with First-Frame Preservation.
arXiv (2025).
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2023. Adding Conditional Control to
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In ICCV.
Yuang Zhang, Jiaxi Gu, Li-Wen Wang, Han Wang, Junqi Cheng, Yuefeng Zhu, Fangyuan
Zou, et al. 2024. MimicMotion: High-Quality Human Motion Video Generation with
Confidence-aware Pose Guidance. In ICML.
Zhenghao Zhang, Junchao Liao, Menghao Li, Zuozhuo Dai, Bingxue Qiu, Siyu Zhu,
Long Qin, and Weizhi Wang. 2025b. Tora: Trajectory-oriented diffusion transformer
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.
•
O. El Khalifi, T. Rossi, O. Fossey, T. Fouque, U. Mizrahi, P. Torr, I. Laptev, F. Pizzati, and B. Bellot-Gurlet
for video generation. In CVPR.
Haitao Zhou, Chuang Wang, Rui Nie, Jinlin Liu, Dongdong Yu, Qian Yu, and Changhu
Wang. 2025a. Trackgo: A flexible and efficient method for controllable video gener-
ation. In AAAI.
Jingkai Zhou, Yifan Wu, Shikai Li, Min Wei, Chao Fan, Weihua Chen, Wei Jiang,
Fan Wang, et al. 2025b. RealisDance-DiT: Simple yet Strong Baseline towards
Controllable Character Animation in the Wild. arXiv (2025).
Shenhao Zhu, Junming Leo Chen, Zuozhuo Dai, Zilong Dong, Yinghui Xu, Xun Cao,
Yao Yao, Hao Zhu, and Siyu Zhu. 2024. Champ: Controllable and consistent human
image animation with 3d parametric guidance. In ECCV.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.