On the Security of Research Artifacts
Nanda Rani and Christian Rossow
CISPA - Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{nanda.rani,rossow}@cispa.de
Abstract. Research artifacts are widely shared to support reproducibil-
ity, and artifact evaluation (AE) has become common at many lead-
ing conferences. However, AE mainly checks whether artifacts work as
claimed and can be reproduced. It largely overlooks potential security
risks. Since these artifacts are publicly released and reused, they may
unintentionally create opportunities for misuse and raise concerns about
safe and responsible sharing. We study 509 research artifacts from top-
tier security venues and find that many contain insecure code patterns
that may introduce potential attack vectors. We propose a taxonomy for
context-aware security assessment to enable structured analysis of such
risks. We perform static analysis and examine the resulting findings,
filtering false positives and identifying real security risks. Our analysis
shows that 41.60% of the prevalent findings may pose security concerns
under practical usage. To support scalable analysis, we introduce SAFE
(Security-Aware Framework for Artifact Evaluation), a first step toward
an autonomous framework that analyzes tool-reported findings by con-
sidering code semantics, execution context, and practical exploitability.
SAFE achieves 84.80% accuracy and 84.63% F1-score in distinguishing
security and non-security risks. Overall, our results show that security is
also important in AE for promoting safe and responsible research sharing.
The source code is available at: 
Keywords: Artifact Evaluation · Empirical Security Analysis · Vulner-
ability Analysis · Context-Aware Security · Security Measurement
Introduction
The sharing of research artifacts has become a central part of modern scien-
tific practice, especially in systems and security research [18,24]. Authors now
routinely release code, datasets, and scripts alongside their papers to support
reproducibility and transparency [14,17,20]. Many top-tier venues encourage this
practice through artifact evaluation (AE) processes and badge systems, which
reward artifacts that are available, functional, and reproducible [6,8,19,23].
While this shift has improved the credibility and transparency of experimen-
tal results, current evaluation pipelines still focus mainly on whether an artifact
works as expected [2,5,18,23]. They check if the code runs and reproduces re-
ported results [8,17]. However, the security of these artifacts is largely overlooked.
Artifacts are often regarded as safe once they are publicly released, but this as-
sumption is rarely examined. As a result, the community has limited insight into
arXiv:2605.06508v1 [cs.CR] 7 May 2026
N. Rani et al.
how secure these artifacts actually are, or whether existing evaluation practices
create a misleading sense of safety.
This gap introduces significant risks in real-world reuse scenarios. Research
artifacts are widely shared and reused by researchers, practitioners, and devel-
opers [11]. They often include complex code, dependencies, and experimental
scripts. Even when not intended for production, parts of these artifacts are fre-
quently reused or adapted in real systems [16,23,26]. In such cases, insecure
practices can carry over and introduce vulnerabilities. Unfortunately, research
artifacts may include insecure coding patterns such as unsafe deserialization,
hardcoded secrets, vulnerable dependencies, or misconfigurations. Identifying
these issues is not straightforward. Static analysis tools can detect potential
problems, but they often generate a large number of warnings without consider-
ing context [9,13]. In addition, the presence of a flagged issue does not necessarily
mean it is exploitable; its risk depends on real-world usage. Some findings re-
main harmless in controlled settings but may become exploitable when artifacts
are reused or extended. These gaps motivated us to address following research
questions:
RQ1: To what extent do publicly released research artifacts contain security
issues, and how often do these issues represent real risks in practice?
RQ2: How can security findings in research artifacts be analyzed in a scalable
and context-aware way using an automated framework?
To answer RQ1, we conduct an empirical study of security risks in publicly
shared research artifacts from top-tier security conferences. We analyze 509 ar-
tifacts using static analysis tools and observe that insecure practices are not
uncommon. At the same time, not all tool-reported warnings lead to actual ex-
ploitability in artifact-specific contexts. To support a more detailed analysis,
we consider factors such as attacker-controlled input, execution context, and
the conditions required for exploitation. Based on this, we assign context-aware
security labels to the findings identified during static analysis.
To answer RQ2, we propose SAFE (Security-Aware Framework for Artifact
Evaluation), a first step toward a scalable and context-aware approach for as-
sessing the security risk of research artifacts. The framework reasons about code
semantics, execution context, and attacker feasibility. It uses a large language
model (LLM) to connect raw static analysis results with practical security under-
standing. SAFE also brings structured reasoning and security checklists into the
evaluation process, so that security can be considered alongside reproducibility
and functionality. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
- We present an empirical study of security risks in publicly shared research
artifacts by analyzing 509 artifacts from top-tier security conferences.
- We introduce a taxonomy for context-aware security assessment of static
findings to support structured classification.
- We demonstrate that insecure practices are not uncommon in publicly re-
leased research artifacts and highlight the gap between tool-reported warn-
ings and their practical exploitability.

On the Security of Research Artifacts
- We present SAFE , a framework that reasons about code semantics, execu-
tion context, and attacker feasibility for artifact-level security assessment.
We evaluate it on static analysis findings and show that it can distinguish
benign issues from practically exploitable risks.
Background & Related Work
Artifact evaluation was first introduced as a voluntary process at ESEC/FSE
2011 [5] and has become a common practice at most top-tier venues. AE aims to
improve transparency and reliability by encouraging authors to share artifacts
such as source code, datasets, and experimental pipelines along with their papers.
Over time, AE has developed into a structured process supported by dedi-
cated committees and incentive mechanisms such as badge systems [5]. These
badges recognize aspects such as artifact availability, functionality, and repro-
ducibility [6,10]. As a result, sharing artifacts has become more common, and
reproducibility is now seen as an essential part of scientific progress [4,3].
2.1
Related Work
Existing studies examine AE’s role in reproducibility and identify both its
strengths and limitations. Olszewski et al. [18] study artifacts from top-tier se-
curity conferences and show that AE improves reproducibility success rates.
Winter et al. [23] review artifact evaluation practices over the past decade and
find that evaluated artifacts do not always meet expectations in terms of usabil-
ity and long-term impact. Guilloteau et al. [7] highlight concerns around artifact
longevity and sustainability, which suggests that current evaluation criteria cap-
ture only a limited view of reproducibility.
Recent work explores LLM-based agents for automated artifact evaluation
and result reproduction to reduce reviewer effort. Baek et al. [2] present Artisan,
an LLM-based agent that generates and validates reproduction scripts to assess
reproducibility at scale. Heye et al. [12] propose a toolkit for reproducibility
assessment and environment setup to reduce reviewer effort and improve scal-
ability. Wu et al. [24] introduce ArtifactCopilot, an agent-based framework to
automates environment setup, execution, and error recovery. These approaches
mainly focus on improving the scalability and efficiency of reproducibility checks.
Research Gap: Prior work focuses mainly on reproducibility and usability, with
no attention to security. Current AE guidelines and badge systems do not check
for insecure coding practices, vulnerable dependencies, or exploitable behavior.
This gap is critical in security research, where artifacts are often reused or inte-
grated into real systems, which can carry forward hidden risks.
Our work addresses this gap through an empirical study of security risks in
research artifacts. We introduce a context-aware approach that connects static
analysis findings with practical exploitability. By combining empirical analysis,
a structured taxonomy, and automated reasoning, we extend artifact evaluation
beyond reproducibility to include security as a key aspect of artifact quality.
N. Rani et al.
Threat Model
We study security risks in research artifacts under realistic usage. Artifacts are
often shared with good intent, but they may still include weaknesses. Our focus
is on what happens after release. Artifacts may be reused, extended, or executed
in shared or cloud environments. Risks can arise when code is unsafe, configu-
rations are weak, or inputs are wrongly assumed to be trusted. Such attacker
influence can arise in realistic usage. For example, users may run artifacts on
datasets downloaded from public repositories, reuse shared configuration files,
or integrate code into workflows where inputs are not strictly validated. In these
cases, adversarial content can propagate into execution without requiring privi-
leged access.
We assume an attacker interacts with the artifact as a normal user or through
its exposed interfaces. The attacker can supply inputs such as data files, config-
uration values, or command-line arguments. We do not assume privileged access
or direct code modification. The main risk is to users who run or reuse the ar-
tifact, where unsafe input or coding practices can affect their system or data. A
vulnerability is treated as exploitable only when three conditions hold: (i) The
affected code is actually executed. (ii) The attacker can control the input or path
that reaches it. (iii) The attack does not rely on unrealistic setup or assumptions,
such as modifying internal code or accessing non-exposed interfaces.
Dataset & Measurement Setup
This section describes the artifact collection, the static analysis pipeline, and
an initial overview of the findings. It establishes the scale and diversity of the
dataset and sets the stage for contextual analysis.
4.1
Artifact Collection
We collect research artifacts from publicly available artifact repositories as-
sociated with two top-tier security conferences: USENIX Security Symposium
2025 and Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2025.
These artifacts typically include source code, scripts, datasets, and experimental
pipelines released alongside the corresponding papers.
Our dataset comprises a total of 509 artifacts spanning multiple domains,
including system security, AI security and software security. The collected ar-
tifacts cover a broad range of programming languages, dependency setups, and
execution workflows, from lightweight scripts to more complex, multi-component
systems. Fig. 1 illustrates the distribution of research artifacts across security do-
mains along with their dominant programming languages. This diversity reflects
the heterogeneous nature of the collected artifacts.
4.2
Static Analysis Pipeline
To identify potential security issues, we use a multi-tool static analysis pipeline
that combines both code-level and dependency-level scanning. At the code level,

On the Security of Research Artifacts
0
50
100
150
Number of Artifacts
Malware
Hardware Security
Network Security
Web Security
Cryptography & Protocol Security
Systems Security
Mobile Security
Privacy & Data Security
ML & AI Security
Software & Application Security
Domain
(a) Distribution across security domains
25
75
125
175
Number of Artifacts
Hack
Shell
Java
Go
JavaScript
RenderScript
Pkl
C++
C
Python
Programming Language
(b) Programming language distribution
Fig. 1: Overview of the collected artifacts. The diversity in both security domains
and programming languages demonstrates the heterogeneity of artifacts.
we use Semgrep [22], a static analysis tool that helps detect insecure coding
patterns such as unsafe deserialization, command injection, and hardcoded se-
crets. We also use Trivy [1] to scan third-party dependencies and identify known
vulnerabilities based on public databases such as CVEs. Together, these tools
provide a more complete view of possible security weaknesses in the artifacts.
For each artifact, we run both tools across the codebase and associated de-
pendency files. The outputs are normalized into a unified structured format,
where each finding is represented with attributes including: artifact_id, tool,
finding_id, category, severity, file, line, message, package, version,
and relevant vulnerability metadata including CWE/CVE identifiers and CVSS
score. Table 5 in the Appendix describes the fields used in the finding repre-
sentation. This standardized representation enables systematic aggregation and
analysis of findings across artifacts and tools.
4.3
Initial Findings Overview
Across all analyzed artifacts, we obtain a total of 325,338 findings from the static
analysis pipeline. The findings show clear variation in type, severity, and source,
and are spread across multiple dimensions. The findings span 220 distinct CWEs,
covering a wide range of issues including insecure coding practices, dependency
vulnerabilities, and configuration problems. Table 1 lists the top-10 most preva-
lent CWEs across the artifact collection. Table 2 illustrates the distribution of
findings across severity levels and tools. The severity of these issues ranges from
low-severity warnings to critical vulnerabilities. We also note differences across
the tools used, as Semgrep focuses on pattern-based code analysis while Trivy
identifies vulnerabilities in third-party dependencies. Findings appear in large
numbers across artifacts, which shows that potential security issues are common
in publicly released research code. However, we find later that a large fraction of
these findings lack sufficient context to determine their practical exploitability.
This scale allows us to systematically characterize security risks across diverse re-
search artifacts and identify systemic patterns in tool-reported findings. Overall,
this dataset provides a comprehensive and diverse foundation for evaluating the
gap between tool-reported issues and realistic security risks in research artifacts.
N. Rani et al.
Table 1: Top-10 prevalent CWEs observed across analyzed research artifacts.
CWE ID Name
# of Artifacts
CWE-502 Deserialization of Untrusted Data
CWE-676 Use of Potentially Dangerous Function
CWE-78
OS Command Injection
CWE-20
Improper Input Validation
CWE-95
Eval Injection
CWE-770 Allocation of Resources Without Limits or Throttling
CWE-1333 Inefficient Regular Expression Complexity
CWE-22
Path Traversal
CWE-400 Uncontrolled Resource Consumption
CWE-200 Exposure of Sensitive Information
Table 2: Summary of static analysis findings.
(a) Severity distribution reported by Trivy
Severity
High Medium
Low
Critical
Ratio (%) 32.90%
47.90%
14.10%
5.10%
(b) Distribution of findings
Tool Semgrep Trivy Total
Count
317,630
7,708 325,338
Taxonomy for Contextual Security Assessment
To distinguish between theoretical vulnerabilities and practical risks, we intro-
duce a taxonomy for contextual security assessment of research artifacts. It cap-
tures the relationship between static analysis findings and realistic exploitability.
5.1
Design Principles
Our taxonomy follows four principles: (i) Exploitability over syntax: We dis-
tinguish insecure patterns from vulnerabilities that are exploitable in practice.
(ii) Context-aware reasoning: Findings are interpreted based on how the ar-
tifact is used, such as training, evaluation, or demo code. (iii) Evidence-driven
analysis: Decisions rely on observed code behavior and dependencies, without
assuming undocumented inputs or deployments. (iv) Conservative classifica-
tion: When evidence is limited, we avoid overestimating risk and account for
uncertainty.
5.2
Contextual Dimensions
To enable consistent and meaningful classification, we define a set of dimensions
that capture how each finding behaves in its actual usage context. These dimen-
sions help us reason about whether a reported issue can translate into a practical
risk. We consider the following dimensions while analyzing the findings:
- Attacker-controlled input: This dimension captures whether an adver-
sary can control inputs to the flagged code. For example, user files, command-
line arguments, or external data. The label takes one of three values: yes,
no, or uncertain, with a brief explanation of how such control may arise.

On the Security of Research Artifacts
- Reachability: This dimension checks whether the flagged code is executed
during use. If it is unreachable, the impact is limited. The label is yes, no,
or uncertain, with a brief note on whether an attacker can trigger it.
- Execution context: This dimension describes the role of the code within
the artifact. For example, a training pipeline, evaluation script, demo, or
deployment component. This context affects exposure and risk. The label is
expressed as text, explaining where and how the code runs in the workflow.
- Exploitation condition: This dimension outlines the conditions needed to
exploit the issue, such as vulnerable dependencies, malicious inputs, or spe-
cific privileges. The description helps clarify whether exploitation is straight-
forward or requires strong assumptions.
These dimensions serve as necessary conditions for practical exploitability. With-
out attacker-controlled input and reachable execution, a reported issue is unlikely
to manifest as a real security risk. Together, they provide a structured basis for
interpreting tool-reported findings. This enables us to move beyond surface-level
warnings and assess the actual risk posed by research artifacts.
5.3
Classification Labels
As false positives are a well-known issue in static analysis of codebases, we
first assign a category to each finding before determining its security label. The
findings are divided into two categories: (i) security-relevant findings and (ii)
non-security findings. If a finding reported by static analysis tools is identified
as a false positive, it is directly categorized as a non-security finding. In contrast,
true positives are categorized as security-relevant findings. The formal taxonomy
categorization flow is illustrated in Figure 2. We assign security labels to each rel-
Static
Analysis
Findings
Security-
relevant
Findings
Non-security
Findings
FALSE_POSITIVE
HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION
CONTEXTUAL_RISK
BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE
Fig. 2: Overview of the formal taxonomy categorization
evant finding using our taxonomy, guided by the design principles in Sections 5.1
and 5.2. These labels capture the practical relevance of a reported issue, rather
than merely its presence in the code. The labels used are described below:
- CONTEXTUAL_RISK: This label captures issues that could become exploitable
depending on how the artifact is used. The risk may arise under real-world
deployment settings. For example, a command injection flaw in a script may
become dangerous if the same code is later exposed through an API.
- HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION: This label refers to unsafe practices with low
practical impact in the current context. They are not immediate threats but
should be improved for better security. For example, weak cryptographic
usage in non-critical components or missing validation in internal utilities.
N. Rani et al.
- BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE: This label represents patterns that may appear
insecure but are acceptable within a controlled research setting. Such cases
are often tied to experimental constraints. For example, inclusion of hard-
coded file paths or simplified configurations used for reproducibility.
- FALSE_POSITIVE: This label is used when the reported issue does not corre-
spond to a real problem in the given context. This happens due to incorrect
pattern matching or when the flagged code is not relevant to execution.
Together, these labels structure the interpretation of tool-reported findings, and
Table 3 explains them. The taxonomy bridges raw detection and practical risk
assessment and forms the basis for further analysis.
Table 3: Labels defined in the taxonomy.
Dimensions
Possible Values
Purpose
Attacker-controlled input yes / no / uncertain
Check adversarial input control
Reachability
yes / no / uncertain
Check whether the code is executed
Execution context
textual
Usage context in artifact
Exploitation condition
textual
Required conditions for exploit
Security label
CR / HR / BRU / FP Assign final risk category
CR = CONTEXTUAL_RISK, HR = HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION, FP = FALSE_POSITIVE,
BRU = BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE.
Empirical Analysis and Key Findings (RQ1)
We apply our taxonomy for contextual security assessment to manually analyze
security findings reported by static analysis tools. In total, the tools generated
325,338 flags, out of which 1,744 were distinct. Given the scale of the data, a
complete manual analysis was not feasible. Therefore, we perform the analysis
on a subset of the prevalent findings to understand the security risks associated
with research artifacts.
To ensure both coverage and practicality, we focus on the most prevalent
types of findings. We identify the top-50 flags that appear across a wide range of
artifacts. Each of these flags is observed in at least 30 distinct artifacts, indicating
that they represent recurring patterns rather than isolated cases. From these top-
50 flags, we randomly sample 5 instances per flag, which results in a dataset of
250 findings for detailed analysis. These instances span 119 distinct artifacts,
providing a diverse view of artifacts.
Overall Analysis. As the collected flags are produced by static analysis tools,
they have the potential to generate false positives, especially in the research arti-
fact context discussed in Section 3. Therefore, we first analyzed the flags and the
corresponding research artifacts to identify false positive cases. As shown in Ta-
ble 4a, out of the 250 findings, 146 (58.40%) were classified as FALSE_POSITIVE
(non-security findings), while the remaining 104 (41.60%) were identified as
security-relevant findings, as our taxonomy discussed in Section 5.
The high proportion of false positives is expected, as static analysis tools are
known to generate a large volume of such flags [9,13]. For example, an artifact

On the Security of Research Artifacts
may be flagged for listing a vulnerable package in requirements.txt, even when
the code does not use that package, because the tool does not consider context.
One such example is shown later in Listing 1.1. However, the remaining find-
ings represent security-relevant issues that require careful examination. From
the perspective of responsible public release of research artifacts, all labels ex-
cept FALSE_POSITIVE indicate potential concern and therefore warrant explicit
declaration during artifact evaluation or public release.
Table 4: Summary of Overall Analysis.
(a) Findings distribution (in %)
Finding Types
Value
False-positive
146 (58.40%)
Security-relevant 104 (41.60%)
Total
250 (100.00%)
(b) Security-relevant findings distribution
Security Finding Type
Value
CONTEXTUAL_RISK
34 (13.60%)
BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE
20 (8.00%)
HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION 50 (20.00%)
Analysis of Security-relevant Findings. We further analyze the security-relevant
findings to understand the types of concerns they represent. As shown in Ta-
ble 4b, within this set, 34 (13.60%) findings are categorized as CONTEXTUAL_RISK,
where exploitability depends on how the artifact is used or deployed. These cases
are particularly important, as they may appear safe in controlled settings but
become risky when reused in different environments. One example (discussed
later in Section 9.2) takes a host address from an external source and executes
it without validation to fingerprint software versions. This creates a contextual
risk, as real use without sanitization can allow command injection. Further, 20
(8.00%) findings belong to BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE, indicating that the flagged
behavior is intentional and necessary to demonstrate attack methods or proposed
techniques, even though it involves security risks. One example (discussed later
in Section 9.1) analyzes bootloader attack surfaces. The code includes private
keys for signing tools. These keys do not affect execution, but the tool flags them
as CWE-798 due to pattern matching without context. We also observe that 50
(20.00%) findings correspond to HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION. These findings
reflect unsafe practices that should be improved, even if they do not pose imme-
diate threats.
RQ1: Key Observation
Nearly two out of five findings in publicly released research artifacts re-
quire careful attention during reuse, extension, and practical deployment.
Implication for Artifact Evaluation. These findings reveal a fundamental gap
in current artifact evaluation practices. Our analysis shows that a consistent
and recurring subset of artifacts contains vulnerabilities that are realistically
exploitable or may become exploitable when reused in different settings. Even
when issues are not immediately exploitable, it often indicates practices that
N. Rani et al.
require attention before artifacts are reused or extended. This calls for a simple
but explicit step at the time of release. A brief statement on potential security
risks can promote responsible sharing and safer reuse of research artifacts. This
observation highlights the need for a more nuanced approach to artifact evalua-
tion, which can explicitly incorporate security assessment. It also motivates the
design of our proposed framework, which can potentially integrate structured
and context-aware security analysis into the artifact evaluation process.
Towards Security-Aware AE Framework
To automate the gap identification between findings and realistic exploitability,
we present SAFE (Security-Aware Framework for Artifact Evaluation)1, a first
step toward a context-aware security assessment that reasons about execution
context, input control, and exploit feasibility. The framework is designed to ap-
proximate analyst-style reasoning through structured, context-aware evaluation
to enable scalable and automated analysis. The framework is guided by princi-
ples that reflect how a security analyst would approach the problem in practice.
It reasons about findings by considering the purpose of the code, how it is exe-
cuted, and what an attacker can realistically control. It also takes into account
the role of each component within the artifact to distinguish between exposed
and non-exposed parts of the system. The framework also remains conservative
in its decisions, explicitly acknowledges uncertainty and avoids overestimation
of risk when evidence is limited, as discussed in Section 5.1.
7.1
System Overview
The framework overview is illustrated in Figure 3. It operates on the artifact
codebase and static analysis findings generated by analysis tools. For each find-
ing, the framework extracts relevant contextual information, including the as-
sociated code snippet, file location, and metadata such as vulnerability type,
severity, dependency, and flagged file details. The system then analyzes the sur-
rounding code to infer the functional purpose of the code segment, its role within
the artifact, as well as its dependencies and interactions with other components.
Semgrep
Trivy
List of
Findings
Static Analysis Findings
Repository Exploration
Contextual Reasoning
Security Assessment
Code Parsing
Dependency Analysis
Search Tool
LLM Analysis (ReAct Agent)
Artifact
Repository
Final Labeled Result
Structured Label
Security Label
Code Purpose
Execution Context
Required conditions for exploit
Input controlled by attacker
Reachability
Evidence
Reasoning & Recommendation 
Fig. 3: SAFE Workflow
Building on this context, the framework applies structured reasoning to assess
exploitability. In our implementation, this reasoning is performed using a large
1 The source code is available at: 

On the Security of Research Artifacts
language model (LLM), which interprets code semantics and integrates multiple
contextual signals to produce a classification aligned with the taxonomy defined
in Section 5. The LLM is instantiated in a ReAct-style agent setting [25], where
it iteratively performs reasoning and tool-assisted actions to dynamically gather
additional context and evidence for making a decision. The framework augments
the agent with a set of filesystem tools shown in the Appendix Table 6.
Tool augmentation allows the framework to analyze artifacts in context, un-
derstand their execution environment and dependencies, and assess exploitabil-
ity in a structured manner. The toolset supports analysis at multiple levels.
Repository-level tools capture the overall structure, file-level tools provide access
to relevant code and configuration details, and semantic tools enable reasoning
about execution flow and program behavior. Together, these components allow
the system to perform more grounded and context-aware security assessment.
7.2
Decision Logic
The core of the framework lies in how it reasons about each finding in a struc-
tured manner. It evaluates findings by considering aspects that influence prac-
tical exploitability. It reasons about whether the input reaching the vulnerable
code can be influenced by an external adversary. When the input to the vul-
nerable code is not controlled by an adversary, the likelihood of exploitation is
significantly reduced.
The framework also examines whether the flagged code is actually executed
during normal artifact usage. Code that resides in unused paths is less likely
to pose a real threat, even if it appears vulnerable in isolation. In addition,
the broader usage context of the code is taken into account. For instance, code
used only in offline experimentation has a different risk profile compared to code
that may be part of a deployable system. This context helps determine how ex-
posed the code is in practice. Some artifacts intentionally include elements such
as private keys or insecure configurations to demonstrate or reproduce attacks
in a controlled setting. These components are used solely for experimentation
and do not represent real-world deployments. Since they are non-operational
outside this context and required to demonstrate the attack method proposed
in the artifact, they are classified as BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE. The workflow
shown in Figure 4 represents the structured reasoning process followed by the
system. The analysis is performed iteratively by the LLM agent, which gathers
Static
Finding
Input Analysis
Is input attacker-
controlled?
Execution Analysis
Is code reachable
in realistic usage?
Context Assessment
Offline vs
deployable setting
Exploitability
Reasoning
Can conditions
realistically lead to
impact?
Final Classification
﻿CONTEXTUAL_RISK
﻿HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION
﻿BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE
﻿FALSE POSITIVE
Fig. 4: Decision logic workflow for assessing the exploitability of static findings.
N. Rani et al.
evidence from the repository and evaluates multiple factors jointly before ar-
riving at a final decision. For each analyzed finding, the framework produces a
structured JSON output capturing both the classification, the reasoning behind
it, and recommendation to fix. captures key details such as the security label,
code purpose, execution context, exploit conditions, evidence, reasoning, and rec-
ommendations. Such structured outputs improve interpretability and facilitate
downstream analysis. An example is shown in Listing 1.1.
Listing 1.1: Example SAFE output for a finding
{
"security_label": "FALSE_POSITIVE ",
"code_purpose": ".... LLM training , poisoning .... workflows.",
"execution_context": "requests ==2.29.0 is listed in
requirements.txt .... the
provided
source
files.",
"required_conditions_for_exploit": "A real
exploit .... use ....
insecure
certificate -verification
pattern
....",
"input_controlled_by_attacker": "no - no Requests .... found in
the
provided
code ....",
"reachable_in_artifact_execution": "no - repository
inspection
found .... no requests.get , requests.post .... usage.",
"evidence_snippet": "requirements.txt pins
requests
==2.29.0.... anywhere
else in the
codebase.",
"reasoning": "The
affected .... requires a reachable
code path
.... no direct .... usage in the
repository ....",
"recommendation": "No artifact -level fix .... Remove
unused
requests .... upgrade it if future
code
starts
using ..."
}
By integrating static analysis with context-aware reasoning, the proposed frame-
work addresses a fundamental limitation of tool’s inability to distinguish between
theoretical and practically exploitable issues. As SAFE is the first step towards
security-aware artifact evaluation, its modular design allows the framework to
be extended with alternative reasoning engines or additional contextual signals,
which makes it applicable beyond the specific implementation used in this work.
Evaluation
We evaluate SAFE to assess how closely its decisions align with expert judgment
on a manually annotated subset of findings. Our goal is to measure classification
performance along with to understand whether SAFE can distinguish realistic
security risks from non-exploitable or context-dependent issues.
8.1
Experiments
To evaluate SAFE against human reasoning, we use the annotated subset of
findings discussed in the Section 6. This subset captures diverse categories of
issues, including high-severity warnings, common insecure coding patterns, and
findings occurring in different parts of the artifact. Each finding in this subset
is labeled based on the taxonomy discussed in Section 5.

On the Security of Research Artifacts
For each finding, SAFE is provided with the codebases and tool-reported
information, and produces both a classification and a structured explanation.
This allows us to analyze how the framework scales and to derive dataset-level
insights about the nature of security issues present in research artifacts.
8.2
Results
Overall Analysis. On the annotated dataset, SAFE achieves an accuracy of
84.80%, with a macro F1-score of 84.63% in distinguishing security-relevant and
non-security findings. Our analysis shows that 82.19% of non-security flags are
correctly classified, while 88.46% of security-relevant flags are correctly identified.
It indicates that the framework prioritizes capturing potential risks, at the cost
of false alarms. Overall, the results suggest that the framework is effective in
separating security-relevant findings from benign ones.
Class-wise Analysis. Further, SAFE achieves an accuracy of 74.14% and a macro
F1-score of 60.35% for overall multi-class analysis. These results indicate that
the framework is able to demonstrate moderate effectiveness in distinguish-
ing between multiple security-relevant categories in research artifacts, despite
the inherent ambiguity and context-sensitive nature of the labels. The current
implementation is based on a single LLM instance and first-step towards the
security-aware artifact analysis, and performance is expected to improve with
more advanced agentic architectures for security assessment.
Our analysis further reveals that the model fails to correctly identify instances
belonging to the BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE category, resulting in zero true posi-
tives for this class. The predictions for this category are distributed as 20.00%
misclassified as CONTEXTUAL_RISK and 80.00% as HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION.
This behavior may occur because many flagged issues reflect real security risks,
even when they are intentionally included to demonstrate how the artifact
works. As a result, the distinction between benign usage, actual risk, and
simple hardening advice often becomes unclear. We further observe that for
HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION, 58.00% of instances are correctly predicted, while
18.00% are misclassified as CONTEXTUAL_RISK and 24.00% as FALSE_POSITIVE.
For the CONTEXTUAL_RISK class, 67.65% of instances are correctly classified,
while 32.35% are misclassified as HARDENING_RECOMMENDATION.
Overall, the performance in identifying both security-relevant and non-security
findings demonstrates that the framework is effective in filtering out non-security
issues. The moderate performance on security-relevant categories demonstrates
that the model captures important aspects of the security context in research ar-
tifacts, while also indicating room for improvement through enhanced reasoning
capabilities and agent-based analysis.
Finally, as a sanity check, we applied SAFE to its own artifact. The analysis
identified a total of 8 findings, including 1 classified as contextual risk and the
remaining as false positives. The contextual risk corresponds to a potential unsafe
deserialization path; however, in our setting, inputs to this component are fully
N. Rani et al.
controlled by the user and do not originate from untrusted sources. Therefore,
the condition required for exploitation is not satisfied under our threat model.
The generated report is available at: 
RQ2: Key Observation
Security findings can be analyzed at scale by combining static analysis
with context-aware reasoning to effectively rule out false positives, but
separating closely related cases still remains challenging.
Cost Analysis We analyze the cost of applying SAFE for artifact evaluation. The
primary cost comes from LLM-based reasoning, while static analysis using Sem-
grep and Trivy adds negligible overhead. We use GPT-4o for SAFE evaluation.
The total input token consumption is 4,483,894 tokens and the total output is
357,830 tokens. This corresponds to an overall cost of $14.79. This results in an
average cost of $0.059 per finding and $0.13 per artifact. The cost scales linearly
with the number of findings since each instance is processed independently. The
overall cost remains modest, which shows that SAFE can be applied to large ar-
tifact collections without significant expense. In terms of runtime, each finding
is processed in 116.82 seconds. The independent nature of the analysis allows
efficient scaling, which makes SAFE practical for large-scale artifact evaluation.
8.3
Limitations and Future Work
The results reveal few limitations, which leave room for improvement in future
work. Addressing these issues can strengthen the suitability of the proposed
framework for inclusion in artifact evaluation and decision-making pipelines.
The difficulty in correctly classifying BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE and the confusion
with adjacent categories suggest that the model struggles to capture fine-grained
semantic boundaries between related security concepts. Additionally, the frame-
work relies on static analysis context and does not incorporate runtime behavior,
which may further limit its ability to distinguish between contextual risk and
benign usage. These limitations show the need for better context modeling and
stronger evidence use in future work.
8.4
Implications to Artifact Evaluation Pipeline
We aim to further refine the efficiency and usability of SAFE to facilitate its
adoption within artifact evaluation workflows. We encourage authors to use
SAFE to document execution assumptions, minimize unsafe practices, and en-
sure that artifacts do not unintentionally expose exploitable behavior when
reused. In addition, we encourage artifact reviewers to move beyond purely
functional validation and consider basic security reasoning, particularly when
assessing whether flagged issues are realistically exploitable. We also encourage
artifact evaluation committee chairs and top-tier venues to promote the use of
lightweight security assessment frameworks like SAFE, to enable a broader shift
toward security-aware evaluation practices.

On the Security of Research Artifacts
We advocate for introducing optional security checks or badges as part of
artifact evaluation, supported by automated tools and simple guidelines. At its
current stage, SAFE is not intended to serve as a mandatory evaluation criterion;
however, it can be effectively adopted as an optional security assessment layer
to encourage responsible artifact release.
Artifact Security Checklist: To support practical adoption, we provide a
lightweight checklist that can be used by authors, and AE chairs reviewers during
artifact evaluation:
- Does the artifact process external or user-controlled input?
- Are unsafe operations like deserialization and shell execution properly vali-
dated or restricted?
- Are third-party dependencies free from known critical known vulnerabilities?
- Is the intended execution context such as offline experiment vs. deployment
clearly documented?
- Are assumptions about trust boundaries and input sources explicitly stated?
This checklist complements automated analysis by encouraging explicit consid-
eration of security-relevant aspects that are often implicit in research code.
Case Studies
To qualitatively evaluate the effectiveness of SAFE, we present representative
case studies from the manually analyzed dataset. These examples illustrate the
importance of context-aware reasoning in distinguishing between benign and
security-risk specific findings in research artifacts.
9.1
Case Study 1: Flagged Issue that is Benign Research Use
In a research artifact which proposes analysis of possible attack surfaces of vari-
ous bootloaders, the static analysis tool flags the presence of a private key in the
repository as a potential security issue (CWE-798: Hard-coded Credentials). At
face value, embedding private keys in source code is considered a severe security
violation. In our deeper inspection, it reveals that the key is part of bundled boot-
loader signing tooling and is explicitly used for local testing and reproducibility
purposes. The file resides within a vendored tool directory and is referenced by
documentation and scripts as a test asset rather than a production credential.
Such reasoning shows that the key is not derived from attacker-controlled
input and is not associated with any live trust boundary or deployment en-
vironment. Furthermore, there is no evidence that the key is used for real-
world authentication or external signing operations. Under the research arti-
fact threat model, the presence of such test credentials is expected and does
not constitute a realistic security risk. Therefore, this instance is labeled as
BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE. A sample of the finding label of this case study is
shown in the Appendix Listing 1.2.
This case demonstrates the ability to avoid over-reporting by incorporating
execution context and intended usage, which enables to understand the distinc-
tion between benign experimental artifacts from real vulnerabilities.
N. Rani et al.
9.2
Case Study 2: Subtle Issue that is a Security-risk
In one research artifact that provides software version fingerprinting based on
responses from a given host address, we analyze a Python script used for black-
box probing of target systems. The code constructs and executes shell commands
using subprocess.Popen(..., shell=True) while dynamically embedding the
variable hostinfo into the command string.
This instance is classified as CONTEXTUAL_RISK. We identify that hostinfo is
directly interpolated into the shell command without validation or sanitization.
As a result, an attacker controlling this input can inject shell metacharacters,
leading to well-known problem of arbitrary command execution [15,21]. More
importantly, the artifact is about software fingerprinting using host address and
run curl command with host address to get the response and analyze response
to identify software version running at host side. If implemented in unsafe envi-
ronment or real-world, attacker can easily modify the input and inject malicious
command along with host address to run on the machine.
The vulnerable code path is directly reachable during normal execution of the
artifact, especially through the main entry point of the proposed system. This
misuse of vulnerable argument to the benign function establishes a concrete and
exploitable command injection pathway. This reasoning demonstrates three crit-
ical factors: attacker-controlled input, reachability during execution, and direct
command execution impact. Even in a research setting, the artifact executes
external input without validation, which makes this input path exploitable in
practice.
This case illustrates the ability to detect subtle but critical vulnerabilities. A
sample of the finding label of this case study is shown in the Appendix Listing 1.3.
Conclusion
Security remains a largely overlooked dimension in current artifact evaluation
processes, which primarily focus on functional correctness and reproducibility.
While these aspects are essential, they do not capture whether the released
artifacts may introduce unintended security risks when reused, extended, or de-
ployed. In this work, we demonstrate the need for context-aware security anal-
ysis in research artifacts. Our findings demonstrate that the security relevance
of a finding depends on execution context, attacker control, and intended usage.
Through SAFE, we show that incorporating structured reasoning enables mean-
ingful distinctions between benign experimental patterns and realistic security
risks. We position SAFE as a first step toward integrating security into artifact
evaluation in a practical and lightweight manner. SAFE provides a framework
that supports authors, reviewers, and artifact evaluation committees in iden-
tifying and reasoning about potential risks. The proposed approach opens the
direction for future systems that combine automated analysis with deeper con-
textual understanding, ultimately contributing to more secure and responsible
release of research artifacts. This shift is essential for aligning artifact evaluation
with the growing need for secure, reusable, and trustworthy research outputs.

On the Security of Research Artifacts
References
1. Aqua Security: Trivy: Vulnerability scanner for containers and other artifacts
(2026),  Accessed: 2026-04-13
2. Baek, D., Pradel, M.: Artisan: Agentic artifact evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.10046 (2026)
3. Barr, E., Bell, J., Hilton, M., Mechtaev, S., Timperley, C.: Continuously acceler-
ating research. In: 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software
Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-NIER). pp. 123-128. IEEE
(2023)
4. Beyer, D., Hartmanns, A.: Reproducibility and replication of research results: A
special issue for rrrr 2022. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology
Transfer 27(4), 397-401 (2025)
5. Beyer, D., Winter, S.: Artifact evaluations for stronger research results. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software
Engineering. pp. 1234-1237 (2025)
6. Guevara-Vega, C., Bernárdez, B., Cruz, M., Durán, A., Ruiz-Cortés, A., Solari,
M.: Research artifacts for human-oriented experiments in software engineering:
An acm badges-driven structure proposal. Journal of Systems and Software 218,
112187 (2024)
7. Guilloteau, Q., Ciorba, F., Poquet, M., Goepp, D., Richard, O.: Longevity of arti-
facts in leading parallel and distributed systems conferences: A review of the state
of the practice in 2023. In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Repro-
ducibility and Replicability. pp. 121-133 (2024)
8. Guilloteau, Q., Poquet, M., Korndörfer, J.H.M., Ciorba, F.M.: Artifact evaluations
as authors and reviewers: Lessons, questions, and frustrations. In: Community
Workshop on Practical Reproducibility in HPC (2024)
9. Guo, Z., Tan, T., Liu, S., Liu, X., Lai, W., Yang, Y., Li, Y., Chen, L., Dong, W.,
Zhou, Y.: Mitigating false positive static analysis warnings: Progress, challenges,
and opportunities. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49(12), 5154-5188
(2023)
10. Hermann, B.: What has artifact evaluation ever done for us? IEEE Security &
Privacy 20(5), 96-99 (2022)
11. Heumüller, R., Nielebock, S., Krüger, J., Ortmeier, F.: Publish or perish, but do
not forget your software artifacts. Empirical Software Engineering 25(6), 4585-
4616 (2020)
12. Heye, D., Kindermann, K., Decker, R., Lohmöller, J., Belova, A., Geisler, S.,
Wehrle, K., Pennekamp, J.: Supporting artifact evaluation with llms: A study with
published security research papers. In: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (BigData). pp. 5077-5085. IEEE (2025)
13. Kang, H.J., Aw, K.L., Lo, D.: Detecting false alarms from automatic static analysis
tools: How far are we? In: Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on
Software Engineering. pp. 698-709 (2022)
14. Malik, T.: Artifact description/artifact evaluation: A reproducibility bane or a
boon. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Practical Reproducible
Evaluation of Computer Systems. pp. 1-1 (2020)
15. MITRE Corporation: Cwe-78: Improper neutralization of special elements used in
an os command (’os command injection’) (2026), 
definitions/78.html, accessed: 2026-04-13
N. Rani et al.
16. Muttakin, A., Mondal, S., Roy, C.K.: The state of open science in software engi-
neering research: A case study of icse artifacts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.02066
(2026)
17. Olszewski, D., Lu, A., Crowder, A., Bennett, N., Layton, S., Varma Bhupathiraju,
S.H., Tucker, T., Kalgutkar, S., Ver Helst, H., Stillman, C., et al.: Reproducibil-
ity in applied security conferences: An 11-year review on artifacts and evaluation
committees. In: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Reproducibility and
Replicability. pp. 96-107 (2025)
18. Olszewski, D., Lu, A., Stillman, C., Warren, K., Kitroser, C., Pascual, A., Ukirde,
D., Butler, K., Traynor, P.: " get in researchers; we’re measuring reproducibility":
A reproducibility study of machine learning papers in tier 1 security conferences.
In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communi-
cations security. pp. 3433-3459 (2023)
19. Olszewski, D., Tucker, T., Butler, K.R., Traynor, P.: {SoK}: Towards a unified
approach to applied replicability for computer security. In: 34th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 25). pp. 469-488 (2025)
20. Sedghpour, M.R.S., Papadopoulos, A.V., Klein, C., Tordsson, J.: Artifact eval-
uation for distributed systems: Current practices and beyond. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.13045 (2024)
21. Semgrep,
Inc.:
Command
injection
in
python:
Prevention
cheat
sheet
(2025), 
accessed: 2026-04-13
22. Semgrep, Inc.: Semgrep: Static analysis tool for code security (2026), https://
github.com/semgrep/semgrep, Accessed: 2026-04-13
23. Winter, S., Timperley, C.S., Hermann, B., Cito, J., Bell, J., Hilton, M., Beyer, D.:
A retrospective study of one decade of artifact evaluations. In: Proceedings of the
30th ACM joint European software engineering conference and symposium on the
foundations of software engineering. pp. 145-156 (2022)
24. Wu, Z., Zhao, Y., Chen, Z., Wang, Z., Wang, H.: Agent-based software artifact
evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02235 (2026)
25. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K.R., Cao, Y.: React:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In: The eleventh international
conference on learning representations (2022)
26. Zilberman, N., Moore, A.W.: Thoughts about artifact badging. SIGCOMM Com-
put. Commun. Rev. 50(2), 60-63 (May 2020)
A
Case Study 1 Output
Listing 1.2: Findings label output
{
"security_label": " BENIGN_RESEARCH_USAGE ",
"code_purpose": "The file .... private
key .... for local ....
workflows.",
"execution_context": "The key is stored
under .... as part of
vendored
bootloader
tooling .... as a test
asset ....",
"required_conditions_for_exploit": "A real
exploit .... require
.... private
key .... live
trust
boundary .... deployed
service .... grants .... signing
authority ...."

On the Security of Research Artifacts
"input_controlled_by_attacker": "no - the key is a static
bundled
file ....",
"reachable_in_artifact_execution": "uncertain - the key may be
used by local .... signing
scripts .... no evidence .... used
for real -world
authentication ....",
"evidence_snippet": "In ..../ TestCert.pem , lines 33 onward
contain
-----BEGIN
PRIVATE KEY -----....",
"reasoning": ".... Semgrep .... detected a private
key .... The
surrounding
path and
filenames
show .... part of vendored
.... tooling .... bundled
test
asset .... no evidence ....
that .... key
protects a live
service .... real
deployment
signing
chain ..... reproducibility ....",
"recommendation": "No .... artifact -level
action is required ..."
}
B
Case Study 2 Output
Listing 1.3: Findings label output
{
"security_label": " CONTEXTUAL_RISK ",
"code_purpose": "Runs .... probing
commands .... target host ,
executes .... curl .... commands .... stores the HTTP/HTTPS
responses
for
version or fingerprint ....",
"execution_context": "Executed .... active
probing
workflow ....
vulnerable
path is reached .... builds a shell
command
and
executes .... subprocess.Popen (... , shell=True).",
"required_conditions_for_exploit": "... attacker
must be able to
.... hostinfo
value .... control
command ...."
"input_controlled_by_attacker": "yes - hostinfo is .... directly
into
shell
command .... without .... sanitization .... can
alter the
executed
command.",
"reachable_in_artifact_execution": "yes
-.... code path .... normal
artifact
logic .... invokes .... calls
subprocess.Popen(
command , shell=True , ...).",
"evidence_snippet": ".... box.py lines 17 -21 define
execute_command () with .... Popen(command , shell=True ,
...) ....",
"reasoning": ".... command -injection .... executes a shell
command .... shell=True .... embedded
directly .... command
.... execution .... not shell -escaped or validated .... can
break out .... and
execute
arbitrary
commands ....",
"recommendation": ".... invoke
curl .... with
shell=False ....
Strictly
validate
hostinfo ...."
}
N. Rani et al.
C
Description of Fields
Table 5 summarizes the fields used to represent each finding in the dataset,
covering metadata, location, and severity details.
Table 5: Description of fields in the finding representation.
Field
Description
artifact_id Unique identifier of the research artifact being analyzed
tool
Name of the analysis tool that reported the finding (Semgrep, Trivy)
finding_id
Identifier assigned to the specific finding (rule ID or CVE ID)
category
Type of issue (code-level issue, dependency vulnerability)
severity
Reported severity level of the finding (Low, Medium, High, Critical)
file
File path in which the issue was detected
line
Line number corresponding to the finding (if applicable)
message
Description of the issue reported by the tool
package
Name of the affected dependency (if applicable)
version
Version of the affected dependency
CWE/CVE
Associated CWE or CVE identifiers
CVSS
CVSS score indicating severity
D
Tools Description
Table 6 outlines the tools used by SAFE to analyze artifacts, focusing on repos-
itory structure, code inspection, and dependency analysis.
Table 6: Tools used by SAFE for context-aware artifact analysis
Tool
Purpose
Functionality
get_repo_tree
Repository struc-
ture analysis
Extracts a hierarchical view of the
repository
find_important_files
Key file discovery Identifies
critical
files
such
as
README and dependencies
read_file
File inspection
Reads file contents
read_snippet
Localized
code
analysis
Extracts context around a specific
line
extract_dependency_files
Dependency
analysis
Retrieves dependency files like re-
quirements.txt and pyproject.toml
detect_entrypoints
Execution
flow
identification
Identifies potential entry points
search_package_usage
Dependency
us-
age tracing
Locates where specific packages are
used within the codebase
search_repo
Codebase search
Performs search across repository
extract_enclosing_function Semantic context
extraction
AST parsing to identify the enclos-
ing function or class for a given line