ORTHOBO: Orthogonal Bayesian Hyperparameter
Optimization
Maresa Schröder∗
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
maresa.schroeder@lmu.de
Pascal Janetzky∗
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Munich Center for Machine Learning
pascal.janetzky@bosch.com
Michael Klar
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
michael.klar@bosch.com
Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
feuerriegel@lmu.de
Abstract
Bayesian optimization is widely used for hyperparameter optimization when model
evaluations are expensive; however, noisy acquisition estimates can lead to un-
stable decisions. We identify acquisition estimation noise as a failure mode that
was previously overlooked: even when the surrogate model and acquisition target
are correctly specified, finite-sample Monte Carlo error can perturb acquisition
values. This can, in turn, flip candidate rankings and lead to suboptimal BO de-
cisions. As a remedy, we aim at variance reduction and propose an orthogonal
acquisition estimator that subtracts an optimally weighted score-function con-
trol variate, which yields an acquisition residual orthogonal to posterior score
directions and which thus reduces Monte Carlo variance. We further introduce
ORTHOBO: a Bayesian optimization framework that combines our orthogonal
acquisition estimator with ensemble surrogates and an outer log transformation.
We show theoretically that our estimator preserves the target, leads to variance
reduction, and improves pairwise ranking stability. We further verify the theoretical
properties of ORTHOBO through numerical experiments where our framework
reduces acquisition estimation variance, stabilizes candidate rankings, and achieves
strong performance. We also demonstrate the downstream utility of ORTHOBO in
hyperparameter optimization for neural network training and fine-tuning.
Introduction
Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is a fundamental component of modern machine learning
systems, and has been used across a wide range of domains, including biology [5, 49], chemistry [67],
manufacturing [1], medicine [44], and physics [57]. Because evaluating hyperparameter candidates
can require substantial computation, Bayesian optimization (BO) is frequently used to identify optimal
hyperparameter configurations under limited evaluation budgets (e.g., [19, 53, 55, 59, 65]). BO fits
a probabilistic surrogate model of the objective and selects new configurations by maximizing an
acquisition function such as expected improvement (EI) [34].2
In our work, we focus on a source of instability that is central to BO decisions but has received
comparatively little attention: the estimation of the acquisition value itself. Acquisition functions
∗Equal contribution
2For a thorough introduction to BO, see, e.g., [23, 53].
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.06454v1 [cs.LG] 7 May 2026

are often treated as deterministic once a surrogate model has been fitted. In many practical BO
pipelines, however, the acquisition value is obtained by marginalizing over uncertain surrogate
parameters, aggregating across surrogate models, or using Monte Carlo (MC) approximations (e.g.,
[10, 30, 48, 55]). As a result, the quantity used to rank candidate configurations is itself a noisy
estimate. This may hurt the performance of BO because BO acts on rankings: even small estimation
errors can flip the order of two candidates with similar acquisition values and lead the BO algorithm
to evaluate many suboptimal configurations (see Fig. 1).
At a technical level, we treat the estimation of the acquisition function as a MC estimation problem
[e.g., 10, 29, 30, 55] and propose a novel orthogonalized estimator of the acquisition value that
serves as a variance-reduction technique, thus improving robustness to sampling errors and stabi-
lizing acquisition rankings. Our notion of orthogonality stems from the orthogonal ML literature
(e.g., [12, 20, 35, 39]) in that our estimator offers robustness due to variance reduction guaran-
tees Note that our notion of robustness differs from that in existing ‘robust’ regression methods,
which aim to protect the surrogate model against corrupted or heavy-tailed observations (e.g., [40]).
A
B
Acquisition-driven
candidate selection
Noisy acquisition
estimate
Bayesian Optimization
Surrogate model
Acquisition function
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Candidate 1
Candidate 2
Sampling noise
flips the ranking
= true acquisition
= noisy estimate
Finite-sample acquisition noise
can reverse the ranking even
when the true preference is
Candidate 1.
Acquisition value
BO identifies two promising candidates
whose true acquisition values are
very similar.
True acquisition function
Very small gap in
true acquisition
value
Cand.
Cand.
Acquisition value
Repeated
sampling
Figure 1: Failure mode in Bayesian HPO:
estimation noise in the acquisition value can
flip rankings and lead to suboptimal configu-
rations.
Example. Consider tuning a classification model
on a large-scale image dataset, where each evalua-
tion requires training on many images and assessing
performance under an imbalanced class distribution.
Two hyperparameter configurations may differ only
slightly (e.g., a deeper network with stronger dropout
versus a shallower network with weaker regulariza-
tion). If estimates of the acquisition values are subject
to noise, BO may spend a suboptimal configuration
simply because it was ranked first due to sampling
noise.
Our contribution is complementary to existing work
on robust BO. Prior methods have mainly focused
on improving the surrogate model, for example
by accounting for kernel misspecification, hyper-
parameter uncertainty, unreliable posterior uncer-
tainty, trust-region localization, or ensemble surro-
gates [8, 11, 16, 38, 45, 48, 59]. Other work has
improved the acquisition formula or its numerical
optimization [2]. However, these approaches do not
directly address the variance of the estimated acquisition values that drive BO decisions. In contrast,
our method improves the statistical quality of the estimated acquisition values used for candidate
selection through a novel variance reduction technique based on orthogonal scores.
ORTHOBO: We build on our orthogonal acquisition estimator and introduce ORTHOBO, a BO
framework for robust hyperparameter optimization. ORTHOBO uses our orthogonalized acquisi-
tion estimation as a core component and combines it with ensemble surrogates [38, 48] and an
outer log transformation [2]. Here, each component serves a distinct role: our orthogonalization
stabilizes acquisition estimation, ensembling addresses structural misspecification and the outer log
transformation improves numerical conditioning during acquisition maximization.
Our ORTHOBO offers several theoretical guarantees. (i) Our proposed orthogonalized acquisition
estimator is unbiased for the marginal EI target and achieves lower variance than the corresponding
naïve MC estimator (→Theorem 4.1). (ii) We further show that the lower acquisition estimation
variance improves the stability of pairwise acquisition rankings (→Proposition 4.3). Intuitively,
this reduces the probability of falsely selecting a candidate based on MC noise, and leads thus to
performance improvements in practice.
Our main contributions are: (1) We propose a novel, orthogonalized estimator for hyperparameter
acquisition, reducing estimation variance without changing the underlying acquisition target. (2) We
develop ORTHOBO, a BO framework that explicitly targets acquisition estimation noise, structural
surrogate misspecification, and numerical instabilities. (3) We provide theoretical guarantees for
variance reduction and ranking stability, and demonstrate improved empirical performance on various
HPO benchmarks. Importantly, ORTHOBO is broadly applicable to essentially all BO problems.
2
Related work3
BO for hyperparameter tuning. BO is a standard approach for HPO (e.g., [19, 55, 65]), particularly
when evaluations of the objective function are expensive. In practice, BO relies on a surrogate
model to approximate the objective and guide the search. A common choice for the surrogate model
are Gaussian processes (GPs) [27, 34, 55]; other alternatives include tree-based and density-based
surrogates such as tree-structured Parzen estimators (TPE) [6, 7, 62]. Subsequent work has addressed
scaling challenges through multi-fidelity methods, batch BO, and trust-region approaches (e.g.,
[16, 17, 26, 63]). However, no method has explicitly studied or addressed acquisition estimation
noise as a failure mode.
Acquisition functions. Surrogate models are used by acquisition functions, which are heuristics to
evaluate the utility of hyperparameter candidates before querying the (expensive) objective function
[4]. The performance of the acquisition function thus directly influences the overall performance. In
the literature, several types of acquisition functions or acquisition frameworks have been proposed
[2, 3, 16, 42, 61, 64]. Prominent examples include, e.g., qLogEI [2], TuRBO [16], and UCB [64]. Our
work is orthogonal to these works, as we focus on improving the estimation and not the acquisition
function itself.4
Robustness to surrogate misspecification. A central weakness of BO is that it relies on a surrogate
model which might be misspecified. Prior work has studied BO under misspecified kernel classes [11],
unknown hyperparameters [8, 27], unreliable posterior uncertainty [45], and a surrogate complexity-
efficiency trade-off [10]. Several practical strategies have been developed to mitigate such failure
modes [3, 16, 38, 40, 48] However, these approaches address structural surrogate misspecification
and thus model uncertainty. In contrast, our method additionally targets estimation noise.
Research gap. We identify acquisition estimation errors as a crucial failure mode in BO that has been
previously overlooked. To address this, we propose an orthogonalized estimator aimed at variance
reduction and that stabilizes acquisition-based decisions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to explicitly formulate acquisition value estimation in BO as a variance reduction problem
and to develop an orthogonalized estimator for improving acquisition-based decisions.
Problem setting
Setup. We consider the standard setup for HPO over a search space Λ ⊆Rd [3, 15]. For a
hyperparameter configuration λ ∈Λ, let f(λ) denote the unknown performance of interest, such
as, e.g., the validation loss or validation error after training a model with hyperparameters λ. The
objective f is expensive to evaluate and can only be observed through noisy evaluations y = f(λ)+ϵ,
where ϵ captures evaluation noise. At each iteration t = 1, . . . , T, the available data are Dt =
{(λi, yi)}t
i=1. We aim to sequentially choose hyperparameter configurations λ1, λ2, . . . , λT to
identify a high-performing configuration within an evaluation budget T.
Recap: BO. The central idea of BO is to maintain a probabilistic model of the unknown objective and
to use it to guide future evaluations [24]. At iteration t = 1, . . . , T, BO fits a probabilistic surrogate
model m to the current dataset and uses an acquisition function α to select the next evaluation point
[3]. The surrogate provides two crucial quantities for decision-making: (i) a prediction of objective
values in unexplored regions, and (ii) a measure of uncertainty about those predictions. BO then
combines these two ingredients through α, which scores candidate points according to their potential
utility for optimization. After selecting a new candidate point, the objective f is evaluated, and the
new observation is added to the dataset D. The surrogate is then updated, and the process repeats. In
this way, BO adaptively concentrates evaluations in regions that are both informative and promising.
As a result, the performance of BO depends on two components: the quality of the surrogate model
and the stability of the acquisition values used to rank candidate configurations.
Surrogate model. Let m index a surrogate model, and θm denote its latent parameters. Conditional
on θm, the surrogate induces a posterior predictive distribution for the objective f(λ) given Dt. In
practice, the parameters θm are not known and must themselves be inferred from data.
3We provide an extended related work in Supplement A. Therein, we also provide a broader review of BO under different
types of misspecification and orthogonal ML.
4We provide a generalization of ORTHOBO at the acquisition function level in Supplement C.
In our work, we focus on expected improvement (EI) [34] as our acquisition function. For a surrogate
model m with parameters θm, we define
EIm(λt; θm) = E

(f ⋆−f(λt))+ | Dt, θm

,
(1)
where f ⋆= mini≤t yi is the currently best observed value up to iteration t and (x)+ := max{0, x}
[34, 55]. In practice, the model parameters are not fixed but follow an approximate posterior
θm ∼qm,t(θ). The marginal EI over the parameters is then given by
EImarg
m
(λt) = Eθm∼qm,t[EIm(λt; θm)],
(2)
which is commonly approximated through MC samples s = 1, . . . , S given a specific MC sampling
budget S [4, 55, 63], i.e.,
c
EI
MC
m (λt) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
EIm(λt; θ(s)
m ),
θ(s)
m ∼qm,t.
(3)
However, c
EI
MC
m
suffers from high variance for small budgets S and sensitivity to approximation
errors in the posterior qm,t, which leads to instability in the estimated acquisition and thus suboptimal
BO decisions.
Finite-sample acquistion estimation noise.5 Bayesian HPO performance depends on the stability
of acquisition values used to rank candidate configurations. In practice, these values are often
obtained by marginalizing over surrogate uncertainty and must be approximated from a finite number
of samples. As a result, the acquisition function itself becomes a noisy estimate: even when the
surrogate model is reasonable, finite-sample MC error can perturb acquisition values, flip candidate
rankings, and thus lead BO to evaluate suboptimal configurations. We identify this acquisition
estimation noise as a overlooked but practically important failure mode.
Our work. In this work, we address instability in BO at the level of the acquisition estimate itself.
Even with a reasonable surrogate family, BO may still perform poorly if the acquisition estimator used
to rank candidate points is noisy, sensitive to approximate inference, or numerically ill-conditioned.
We treat the EI-scale marginal acquisition obtained by integrating over surrogate uncertainty as an
MC estimation problem. We then propose an orthogonal acquisition estimator that reduces variance
induced by surrogate uncertainty, while preserving the underlying EI-scale target. Therein, we
subtract an optimally weighted score-function control variate, which yields an acquisition residual
orthogonal to posterior score directions and which thus reduces MC variance. In ORTHOBO, we
further combine our orthogonality acquisition estimator for variance reduction with an ensemble of
surrogate models and adaptive model weighting optimized through an outer log transformation to
obtain a full, state-of-the-art BO framework.
Orthogonal Bayesian optimization
Large variance 
 unstable ranking
Rank
reversal;
overlapping
estimates
Unbiased
Current BO state
BO update
Surrogate
posteriors
Aggregation andstabilization
Orthogonal acquisition estimation
Rank candidates for 
Candidate
hyperparam.
Expensive
model
evaluation
 (selected)
...
Evaluate
selected 
Data at
iteration :
Observe 
 and
update 
Goal: Select the next
hyperparam. setting
Repeat for 
Input from current BO state
 ,
 surrogates
...
...
 MC samples per 
Candidate rankings
Small variance 
 stable ranking
stable
ordering
Naive MC
Orthogonalized acquisition
...
Lower
variance
Locally
robust
Naive MC
Orthogonalization
Address surrogate misspecification
and numerical instabilitiy
Ensemble across 
 models
with adaptive model
weights 
Outer log stabilization
 Orthogonalization substracts a correction term that
reduces estimator variance 
Figure 2: Our proposed ORTHOBO. It improves acquisition estimation through variance reduction.
For this, we orthogonalize the acquisition estimation without changing the acquisition target.
Below, we present ORTHOBO, our orthogonalized framework for BO that addresses the failure
modes discussed above (an overview is shown in Fig. 2). We first present our main contribution: the
5We discuss structural surrogate misspecification due to improper surrogate model classes and numerical instabilities due
to small or skewed acquisition values in Supplement B.
orthogonal acquisition estimator (Section 4.1). Of note, we do not change the acquisition target, but
rather improve the estimation through variance reduction techniques. Then, we provide example
instantiations of our orthogonal framework for two common surrogate classes (Section 4.2). We then
present ORTHOBO, where we embed our orthogonal acquisition estimator inside a state-of-the-art
BO algorithm (Section 4.3). In the main text, we focus on EI-based acquisition functions in order to
keep the notation and theoretical arguments simple. The key object throughout is the marginal EI
under surrogate uncertainty and ensemble aggregation. We provide extensions to constrained and
parallel acquisition functions in Supplement C.
4.1
Orthogonal acquisition estimator
We now address the instability due to acquisition estimation noise. Our key idea is to introduce an
orthogonalized acquisition functional that shares the same marginal target as the original EI but has
reduced variance under qm,t. Let g(θ) := ∇θ log qm,t(θ) denote the posterior score function.
We define the orthogonalized EI as
EIorth
m
(λ; θ) := EIm(λ; θ) −γm(λ)⊤g(θ),
(4)
where γm(λ) := Σ−1
g
Covqm,t
 g, EIm(λ; ·)

and Σg := Covqm,t(g, g). The corresponding
marginal acquisition is
EIorth,marg
m
(λ) := Eθ∼qm,t
h
EIorth
m
(λ; θ)
i
.
(5)
The associated MC estimator is
c
EI
orth
m
(λ) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
EIorth
m
(λ; θ(s)
m ),
θ(s)
m ∼qm,t.
(6)
Of note, the construction is non-trivial because g(θ) is based on the parameter posterior, whereas
common MC pipelines sample only from the predictive posterior over function values. We therefore
draw parameter samples explicitly and evaluate both EIm and g at the same θ(s)
m . In practice, γm(λ)
is unknown and we use the empirical plug-in ˆγm(λ) estimated from the same MC samples; this
introduces an in-sample bias of order O(1/S) that is dominated by the O(1/
√
S) sampling standard
deviation at the MC budgets used in our experiments.6
Properties of the orthogonalized acquisition. The orthogonalized EI satisfies three key properties:
(i) preserved target: it has the same marginal as the original EI, so the BO target is unchanged;
(ii) variance reduction: it has smaller variance under qm,t; and (iii) local robustness: it is first-order
insensitive to score-tilt perturbations of qm,t.
Regularity conditions for the score function. Throughout our analysis, we assume that the
surrogate parameter distribution qm,t has a differentiable density on a support Θ ⊆Rdθ and that
the corresponding boundary term vanishes, i.e.,
R
Θ ∇θqm,t(θ) dθ = 0. This holds, for example, if
Θ = Rdθ and qm,t(θ) →0 sufficiently fast as ∥θ∥→∞.
Theorem 4.1 (Variance reduction). Assume that Eqm,t[EIm(λ; θ)2] < ∞and Eqm,t[∥g(θ)∥2
2] < ∞,
that Σg is nonsingular, and that the standard score-function regularity conditions hold for qm,t. Then:
(i) Preserved target. E[EIorth
m
(λ; θ)] = EImarg
m
(λ; θ).
(ii) Variance reduction. Under qm,t, we achieve
Var
 EIorth
m
(λ; θ)

= Var
 EIm(λ; θ)

−Cov(g, EIm)⊤Σ−1
g
Cov(g, EIm) ≤Var
 EIm(λ; θ)

. (7)
Proof. We provide a proof in Supplement E.
Due to the orthogonal score construction, our estimator is further locally robust to perturbations in
the score-tilt direction.
6Sample-splitting (cross-fitting) would restore exact finite-sample unbiasedness without changing the leading asymptotic
variance; see Supplement E.
Corollary 4.2 (Local robustness.). Assume the conditions of Theorem 4.1. For any b ∈Rdθ, consider
the tilted family q(ε)
m,t(θ) ∝qm,t(θ) exp
 ε b⊤g(θ)

for small |ε|. Holding γm(λ) fixed at its ε = 0
value, it holds that
d
dε Eq(ε)
m,t
h
EIorth
m
(λ; θ)
i
ε=0
= 0.
(8)
Proof. We provide a proof in Supplement E.
Implications for acquisition estimation. Theorem 4.1(i) shows that orthogonalization preserves the
BO target. Since the MC estimator is an i.i.d. sample mean, Var(c
EI
orth
m
(λ)) = Var(EIorth
m
(λ; θ))/S,
Theorem 4.1(ii) directly implies Var(c
EI
orth
m
(λ)) ≤Var(c
EI
MC
m (λ)) for any MC budget S, which
improves the stability of acquisition-based decisions. Corollary 4.2 provides local robustness in the
orthogonal ML sense [12, 35]: small score-tilt perturbations of qm,t do not affect the orthogonalized
acquisition to first order. Importantly, Theorem 4.1 is a within-model result: orthogonalization
stabilizes acquisition estimation conditional on qm,t, but does not directly correct structural misspeci-
fication of the surrogate family. We address the latter through ensemble modeling in Section 4.3.
Proposition 4.3 (Pairwise ranking stability). Let λ, λ′ ∈Λ such that ∆(λ, λ′) := EImarg
m
(λ) −
EImarg
m
(λ′) > 0. Let b∆MC(λ, λ′) and b∆orth(λ, λ′) denote the corresponding Monte Carlo difference
estimators. Then both estimators are unbiased for ∆(λ, λ′), and
P

b∆orth(λ, λ′) ≤0

≤
Var

b∆orth(λ, λ′)

Var

b∆orth(λ, λ′)

+ ∆(λ, λ′)2
≤
Var

b∆MC(λ, λ′)

Var

b∆MC(λ, λ′)

+ ∆(λ, λ′)2 .
(9)
Proof. We provide a proof for Proposition 4.3 in Supplement E.
Proposition 4.3 shows how acquisition estimation noise propagates into BO decisions. High estimator
variance can flip the estimated sign of the acquisition gap between two candidates points, thus
causing BO to select a suboptimal point. Orthogonalization reduces the variance without changing
the acquisition target, and therefore directly reduces the probability of such ranking errors.
4.2
Instantiations for common surrogates
We instantiate ORTHOBO for two surrogate classes common in HPO: A Gaussian process and B
tree-based density surrogates. The first corresponds to the standard BO setting, while the second
captures widely used non-Gaussian and nonparametric approaches such as TPE-style optimization.
A Gaussian process (GP) surrogate
For GP surrogate models [27, 34, 55], acquisition estimation noise is often driven by sensitivity
of the mean µ(·) and variance σ(·) function to lengthscale and noise hyperparameters. We show
that orthogonalization reduces MC fluctuations induced by uncertainty in these directions. This
is especially useful early in optimization when the approximation of the posterior over the GP
hyperparameters is diffuse. Let
f ∼GP(mθ(·), kθ(·, ·)) ,
(10)
where here mθ denotes the mean function (typically taken constant or zero) and kθ the covariance
kernel with θ ∈Θ ⊂Rdθ collecting the surrogate hyperparameters, such as kernel lengthscales,
amplitude, and noise variance. Given data Dt = {(λi, yi)}t
i=1, the predictive distribution at a
candidate λ is
f(λ) | Dt, θ ∼N
 µt(λ; θ), σ2
t (λ; θ)

,
(11)
with
µt(λ; θ) = mθ(λ) + kθ(λ, Λt)⊤ Kθ(Λt, Λt) + σ2
nIt
−1 (yt −mθ(Λt)) ,
(12)
σ2
t (λ; θ) = kθ(λ, λ) −kθ(λ, Λt)⊤ Kθ(Λt, Λt) + σ2
nIt
−1 kθ(λ, Λt),
(13)
where Λt = (λ1, . . . , λt) and yt = (y1, . . . , yt)⊤, and K denotes the Gram matrix. We aim to
maximize the EI
EIGP(λ; θ) = (f ⋆−µt(λ; θ)) Φ(zt(λ; θ)) + σt(λ; θ) ϕ(zt(λ; θ)),
(14)
where
zt(λ; θ) = f ⋆−µt(λ; θ)
σt(λ; θ)
,
f ⋆= min
i≤t yi,
(15)
and Φ and ϕ denote the standard normal cumulative distribution and probability density function.
We assume an approximate posterior qt(θ) over GP hyperparameters, obtained for example via a
Laplace approximation or variational Gaussian approximation. The marginal acquisition is then
EIGP,marg(λ) = Eθ∼qt

EIGP(λ; θ)

,
(16)
and the orthogonalized estimator is
c
EI
GP,orth(λ) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
h
EIGP(λ; θ(s)) −γGP(λ)⊤gt(θ(s))
i
,
θ(s) ∼qt,
(17)
where gt(θ) = ∇θ log qt(θ) and γGP(λ) = Cov(gt, gt)−1 Cov
 gt, EIGP(λ; θ)

.
B Tree-based / TPE-style surrogate
As a second instantiation, we consider tree-based or density-based surrogates as in Tree-structured
Parzen Estimators (TPE) [6, 7, 62]. Rather than modeling p(y | λ) directly, TPE-style methods model
p(λ | y) =
ℓθ(λ),
y < y⋆,
gθ(λ),
y ≥y⋆,
(18)
where y⋆is a quantile threshold and θ denotes model parameters, such as kernel density bandwidths,
mixture weights, or tree parameters. In this setting, the acquisition is proportional to a density ratio:
EITPE(λ; θ) ∝ℓθ(λ)
gθ(λ).
(19)
More generally, we denote the EI as hTPE(λ; θ) := EITPE(λ; θ), where hTPE represents either the
exact acquisition induced by the density model or a practical approximation.
Unlike the GP case, differentiability of qt(θ) may not be possible. We therefore consider a more gen-
eral control variate construction. Let ct(θ) ∈Rdc denote any random vector satisfying Eqt[ct(θ)] = 0,
such as centered bootstrap statistics, centered density ratio proxies, centered bandwidth or split sum-
maries, or score functions when they exist. We then obtain our orthogonal acquisition estimator by
c
EI
TPE,orth(λ) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
h
hTPE(λ; θ(s)) −γTPE(λ)⊤ct(θ(s))
i
,
θ(s) ∼qt,
(20)
with
γTPE(λ) = Cov(ct, ct)−1 Cov
 ct, hTPE(λ; θ)

.
(21)
4.3
ORTHOBO
We present the full ORTHOBO procedure in Alg. 1. Therein, we combine our orthogonalized
acquisition estimator with ensemble surrogates and an outer log transformation.
Ensemble surrogates. To mitigate structural surrogate misspecification, we consider an ensemble of
surrogate models m = 1, . . . , M. Such ensembles can consist of Gaussian processes with different
kernels, models with varying likelihood assumptions, various tree-based or neural surrogates. For
each model m, we obtain the respective orthogonalized acquisition estimate c
EI
orth
m
(λ). We then
ensemble the acquisition as a weighted average of weights πm,t
c
EI
ens(λ) =
M
X
m=1
πm,tc
EI
orth
m
(λ).
(22)
Exponentially weighted aggregation. We update ensemble weights through tempered exponentially
weighted aggregation [25], a widely used approach in model aggregation [18, 32, 54]. A minimum
weight floor [28] prevents premature collapse onto a single surrogate
πm,t ∝max(δ, πm,t−1 exp(ℓm,t/τ)),
(23)
where ℓm,t is a predictive log score obtained from mt using (λt+1, yt+1), τ > 0 a temperature
parameter, and δ > 0 enforces a minimum weight. This results in a robust aggregation rule that
balances exploitation of well-performing surrogates with persistent exploration across model classes.
Note, that our overall methodology is independent and can be combined with other update strategies.
Algorithm 1: ORTHOBO
Input: Initial data size n0, budget T , number of surrogate models
M, candidate set generator Ct, numerical floor α > 0,
objective function f
Initialize D0 = {(λi, yi)}n0
i=1 using random hyperparameter
configurations drawn from a Sobol distribution
for t = 0, 1, . . . , T −1 do
for m = 1, . . . , M do
Fit surrogate model m on Dt;
Obtain approximate posterior qm,t(θ);
end
Update ensemble weights πm,t for m = 1, . . . , M;
foreach λ ∈Ct do
for m = 1, . . . , M do
Orthogonalization: Compute orthogonalized
marginal EI estimate c
EI
orth
m
(λ) via Eq. (6);
end
Ensemble strategy:
c
EI
ens(λ) =
M
X
m=1
πm,t c
EI
orth
m
(λ)
end
Outer log transformation:
λt+1 = arg max
λ∈Ct
log
 max(c
EI
ens(λ), α)

Evaluate yt+1 = f(λt+1); update
Dt+1 = Dt ∪{(λt+1, yt+1)};
end
Output: Best observed configuration in DT
Optimization based on outer log stabilization.
To improve numerical stability, we follow re-
cent literature [2] and optimize the outer log
transformed acquisition
bLens(λt) = log
 max(c
EI
ens(λt), α)

,
(24)
where α > 0 ensures that the logarithm is well
defined. We select the next hyperparameter con-
figuration λt+1 = arg maxλ∈Ct bLens(λ), and
evaluate it on the true objective to obtain yt+1.
Empirical results
Experimental setup. • Baselines: We evalu-
ate ORTHOBO against various baselines from
the literature. Specifically, we compare OR-
THOBO against: qLogEI [2] (main comparison
method), UCB [64], TuRBO [16], and Sobol
sampling (e.g., [3]). Our experimental settings
follow prior literature (e.g., [2, 3]): unless other-
wise noted, all experiments use 16 replications,
S = 512, and we start all methods from the
same n0 = 32 Sobol points. For optimizing the
acquisition functions, we use 512 raw samples and allow 8 restarts to prevent getting stuck in local
minima [58]. To isolate the effect of orthogonalization, we use M = 1 throughout the experiments in
the main paper. • Datasets: We consider four standard benchmarking functions with known global
optima (to compute the regret) and varying dimensionality: Hartmann6, Ackley8, Michalewicz10,
and Levy16 (e.g., [2, 10, 15, 43]). Details of the benchmark functions and surrogate choices are
provided in Supplement F. • Metrics: We compare methods using best-so-far regret and report 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) from standard normal approximation.
Evaluation. Our goal is to first demonstrate the theoretical properties of ORTHOBO by isolating
the effect of orthogonalization of the acquisition estimation. For this, we show RQ1 the variance
reduction and RQ2 ranking stability properties of ORTHOBO. Then, we evaluate the resulting
RQ3 efficiency gain in terms of MC sampling budget. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness for
real-world training and fine-tuning tasks where we show RQ4 the improved downstream utility.
We present further experiments on misspecified surrogate families, weakly fitted hyperparameters or
surrogates, CIFAR10, and ensemble experiments in Supplement G.
Table 1: Variance reduction through orthogonalization
(with Sobol probes; ×10−8).
Michalewicz10
Levy16
S
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
) Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
9.50861
4.54151
105590.0
70935.8
(-52.24%)
(-32.82%)
1.66805
0.10681
20765.8
2266.7
(-93.60%)
(-89.08%)
RQ1 Variance reduction. We probe the
acquisition function with random Sobol
samples and compare the estimated vari-
ance of the raw and orthogonalized acquisi-
tion function. We use a GP surrogate. We
report results for a Matérn-5/2 kernel with
ARD on Michalewicz10 and Levy16 in Ta-
ble 1; results for an RBF kernel and a TPE
surrogate are in Supplement G.1. ⇒Across
all settings, orthogonalization reduces the variance, which confirms that ORTHOBO substantially
stabilizes the acquisition estimate.
RQ2 Ranking stability. We repeatedly evaluate the acquisition function on the same fixed Sobol
probe set and compare the rankings across runs. We report: (i) Probe variance: mean variance of the
acquisition value over the probe points across repeated acquisition evaluations; (ii) Top1 agreement:
fraction of repeats that select the same top-ranked probe point; (iii) the Flip rate of adjacent high-
ranked candidate pairs, and (iv) Regret. The flip rate mirrors the idea behind Proposition 4.3, in
that it measures how often local pairwise orderings change due to noise in the acquisition-function
estimation. The main results are in Table 2; further results are in Supplement G.1. ⇒Our variance
reduction yields more stable rankings.
Table 2: Ranking stability (mean±std), via Sobol probes. Lower vari-
ance and flip rate indicate more stable acquisition estimates; higher top-
1 agreement indicates more stable candidate rankings across probes.
Method
Probe
Top1
Flip
Regret ↓
variance ↓
agreement ↑
rate ↓
Michalewicz10
qLogEI
168.603154.76
0.9250.16
0.1480.12
7.1400.01
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0190.03
0.9880.06
0.0140.03
6.9610.36
Levy16
qLogEI
233.655287.67
0.9170.12
0.0690.09
82.1946.05
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0730.21
0.9880.06
0.0480.04
58.9380.00
RQ3 MC efficiency. We
use an isotropic RBF ker-
nel (as a common smooth
GP prior) combined with
a moderate surrogate mis-
match and reduced budges
for the acquisition.
We
show the main results for
varying S on Ackley8 in
Fig. 3; further results are in Fig. 12 in Supplement G. Reducing the MC budget makes the per-
formance of acquisition-based methods more sensitive to estimation noise. Across all benchmarks,
our ORTHOBO remains competitive and frequently achieves the lowest regret. ⇒Orthogonalization
is especially effective in earlier iterations, where MC estimation noise has a larger effect on the
acquisition values.
50
150
Iteration
16
20
Ackley8
Best-so-far regret
MC = 64
50
150
Iteration
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
MC = 128
50
150
Iteration
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
MC = 256
50
150
Iteration
16
20
MC = 512
Sobol
UCB
TuRBO
qLogEI
OrthoBO (ours)
Figure 3: MC efficiency. Best-so-far regret for different MC budgets S ⇒ORTHOBO achieves the
lowest regrets across all budgets.
RQ4 Downstream utility.
We show how ORTHOBO improves hyperparameter optimization
on two real-world tasks: (i) training a neural network and (ii) optimizing fine-tuning hyperpa-
rameters of a pre-trained vision transformer (ViT) [14] for manufacturing image classification.
20
60
100
Iteration
0.950
0.975
Best-so-far value
5D CNN, outlier with 20% prob.
UCB
TuRBO
RPR
qLogEI
OrthoBO (ours)
Figure 4: Training (5D CNN). Outliers (20%
prob.) are injected to make MNIST training
more challenging. ⇒ORTHOBO achieves
the strongest final performance.
(i) Training (neural network). We employ the 5D
CNN benchmark by Ament et al. [3] and include their
RPR method as comparison. Details are in Supple-
ment F.3. To make the training more challenging, we
introduce outliers with 20% probability at different it-
erations, which can distort the surrogate fit, especially
early in BO when only few observations are available.
Results on MNIST [37] are in Fig. 4; CIFAR10 [36]
results are in Fig. 13. ⇒Here, ORTHOBO improves
steadily over the optimization horizon and achieves
the best value.
5
15
Iteration
0.3
0.4
0.5
Best-so-far value
ViT finetuning for manufacturing
Sobol
UCB
TuRBO
qLogEI
OrthoBO (ours)
Figure 5: Fine-tuning (ViT). ⇒ORTHOBO
improves faster than the baselines and
achieves the highest best-so-far validation
score.
(ii) Fine-tuning (vision transformer). We optimize
five fine-tuning hyperparameters on the industrial
WM811K wafer-map dataset [33, 66] for a vision
transformer (ViT) based on the F1 score. Details
are provided in Appendix F.4. We present results
in Fig. 5. ORTHOBO improves rapidly within the
first few evaluations and maintains the highest best-
so-far validation F1 score throughout most of the
optimization horizon. ⇒Compared with qLogEI,
ORTHOBO improves the best observed validation
F1 score by up to 20 percentage points. This demonstrates that the ORTHOBO also improves
performance in a practical, high-cost HPO setting beyond synthetic benchmarks.
Discussion
• Conclusion. We introduce ORTHOBO: a novel orthogonalized framework for reducing variance
when estimating the acquisition function. As a result, our work identifies a failure mode of BO
that was previously overlooked: BO decisions depend on the ranking of estimated acquisition
values, so MC noise in these estimates can directly induce ranking errors and lead to suboptimal
evaluations. ORTHOBO addresses this failure mode by reducing variance while preserving the
underlying marginal EI target. Our results show that this variance reduction improves ranking
stability and translates into better downstream BO performance. • Limitations. First, ORTHOBO
introduces additional computational overhead; however, the overhead is typically small compared with
expensive evaluations of the objective function in HPO (see Supplement D). Second, we focus only
on EI-based acquisition functions. Note that the same variance-reduction principle can be extended
to other acquisition functions but may require acquisition-specific orthogonalization schemes (see
Supplement C.1). • Implications. Our framework is widely applicable not only to HPO but essentially
all BO problems, including in marketing and medicine.
References
[1] A. AlBahar, I. Kim, and X. Yue. A robust asymmetric kernel function for Bayesian optimization,
with application to image defect detection in manufacturing systems. IEEE Transactions on
Automation Science and Engineering, 19(4):3222-3233, 2021.
[2] S. Ament, S. Daulton, D. Eriksson, M. Balandat, and E. Bakshy. Unexpected improvements to
expected improvement for Bayesian optimization. In Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2023.
[3] S. Ament, E. Santorella, D. Eriksson, B. Letham, M. Balandat, and E. Bakshy. Robust Gaussian
processes via relevance pursuit. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
[4] M. Balandat, B. Karrer, D. Jiang, S. Daulton, B. Letham, A. G. Wilson, and E. Bakshy.
Botorch: A framework for efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian optimization. In Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
[5] T. Ban, M. Ohue, and Y. Akiyama. Efficient hyperparameter optimization by using Bayesian op-
timization for drug-target interaction prediction. In International Conference on Computational
Advances in Bio and Medical Sciences (ICCABS), 2017.
[6] J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. Kégl. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization.
In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2011.
[7] J. Bergstra, D. Yamins, and D. Cox. Making a science of model search: Hyperparameter
optimization in hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures. In International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2013.
[8] F. Berkenkamp, A. P. Schoellig, and A. Krause. No-regret Bayesian optimization with unknown
hyperparameters. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(50):1-24, 2019.
[9] P. J. Bickel, C. A. Klaassen, P. J. Bickel, Y. Ritov, J. Klaassen, J. A. Wellner, and Y. Ritov.
Efficient and adaptive estimation for semiparametric models, volume 4. Springer, 1993.
[10] E. Bodin, M. Kaiser, I. Kazlauskaite, Z. Dai, N. Campbell, and C. H. Ek. Modulating surrogates
for Bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
[11] I. Bogunovic and A. Krause. Misspecified Gaussian process bandit optimization. In Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
[12] V. Chernozhukov, D. Chetverikov, M. Demirer, E. Duflo, C. Hansen, W. Newey, and J. Robins.
Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters. The Econometrics
Journal, 21:C1-C68, 2018.
[13] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
248-255. Ieee, 2009.
[14] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani,
M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[15] D. Eriksson and M. Poloczek. Scalable constrained Bayesian optimization. In International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2021.
[16] D. Eriksson, M. Pearce, J. Gardner, R. D. Turner, and M. Poloczek. Scalable global optimization
via local Bayesian optimization. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
[17] S. Falkner, A. Klein, and F. Hutter. BOHB: Robust and efficient hyperparameter optimization at
scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[18] W. Fedus, B. Zoph, and N. Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models
with simple and efficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(120):1-39, 2022.
[19] M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg, M. Blum, and F. Hutter. Efficient and
robust automated machine learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
2015.
[20] D. J. Foster and V. Syrgkanis. Orthogonal statistical learning. The Annals of Statistics, 51(3):
879-908, 2023.
[21] D. Frauen, M. Schröder, K. Hess, and S. Feuerriegel. Orthogonal survival learners for estimating
heterogeneous treatment effects from time-to-event data. In Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2025.
[22] D. Frauen, A. Deviyani, M. van der Schaar, and S. Feuerriegel. Nonparametric LLM evaluation
from preference data. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2601.21816, 2026.
[23] P. I. Frazier. Bayesian optimization. In Recent advances in optimization and modeling of
contemporary problems, pages 255-278. 2018.
[24] P. I. Frazier. A tutorial on Bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1807.02811, 2018.
[25] Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an
application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55(1):119-139, 1997.
[26] J. González, Z. Dai, P. Hennig, and N. Lawrence. Batch Bayesian optimization via local
penalization. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
2016.
[27] H. Ha, V. Nguyen, H. Tran-The, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, and A. v. d. Hengel. Provably efficient
Bayesian optimization with unknown Gaussian process hyperparameter estimation. arXiv
preprint, arXiv:2306.06844, 2023.
[28] M. Herbster and M. K. Warmuth. Tracking the best expert. Machine learning, 32(2):151-178,
1998.
[29] J. M. Hernández-Lobato, M. W. Hoffman, and Z. Ghahramani. Predictive entropy search for
efficient global optimization of black-box functions. In Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2014.
[30] J. M. Hernández-Lobato, M. Gelbart, M. Hoffman, R. Adams, and Z. Ghahramani. Predictive
entropy search for Bayesian optimization with unknown constraints. In International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
[31] K. Hess, D. Frauen, N. Kilbertus, and S. Feuerriegel. Debiased neural operators for estimating
functionals. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2604.19296, 2026.
[32] R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of local experts.
Neural Computation, 3(1):79-87, 1991.
[33] J.-S. R. Jang. Mir-wm811k: Dataset for wafer map failure pattern recognition. http://
mirlab.org/dataset/public/, 2015.
[34] D. R. Jones, M. Schonlau, and W. J. Welch. Efficient global optimization of expensive black-box
functions. Journal of Global Optimization, 13(4):455-492, 1998.
[35] E. H. Kennedy. Semiparametric doubly robust targeted double machine learning: a review.
Handbook of Statistical Methods for Precision Medicine, pages 207-236, 2024.
[36] A. Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
[37] Y. LeCun, C. Cortes, and C. Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database. ATT Labs [Online].
Available:  2, 2010.
[38] Q. Lu, K. D. Polyzos, B. Li, and G. B. Giannakis. Surrogate modeling for Bayesian optimization
beyond a single Gaussian process. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 45(9):11283-11296, 2023.
[39] L. Mackey, V. Syrgkanis, and I. Zadik. Orthogonal machine learning: Power and limitations. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[40] R. Martinez-Cantin, K. Tee, and M. McCourt. Practical Bayesian optimization in the presence
of outliers. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
2018.
[41] V. Melnychuk and S. Feuerriegel. GDR-learners: Orthogonal learning of generative models for
potential outcomes. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2509.22953, 2025.
[42] H. B. Moss, D. S. Leslie, J. Gonzalez, and P. Rayson. GIBBON: General-purpose information-
based Bayesian optimisation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(235):1-49, 2021.
[43] H. B. Moss, S. W. Ober, and V. Picheny. Inducing point allocation for sparse Gaussian processes
in high-throughput Bayesian optimisation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics (AISTATS), 2023.
[44] V. Nath, D. Yang, A. Hatamizadeh, A. A. Abidin, A. Myronenko, H. R. Roth, and D. Xu.
The power of proxy data and proxy networks for hyper-parameter optimization in medical
image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, 2021.
[45] W. Neiswanger and A. Ramdas. Uncertainty quantification using martingales for misspecified
Gaussian processes. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), 2021.
[46] X. Nie and S. Wager. Quasi-oracle estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects. Biometrika,
108(2):299-319, 2021.
[47] M. Oprescu, V. Syrgkanis, and Z. S. Wu. Orthogonal random forest for causal inference. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
[48] K. D. Polyzos, Q. Lu, and G. B. Giannakis. Bayesian optimization with ensemble learning
models and adaptive expected improvement. In International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023.
[49] A. Quitadadmo, J. Johnson, and X. Shi. Bayesian hyperparameter optimization for machine
learning based eqtl analysis. In International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational
Biology, and Health Informatics, 2017.
[50] J. M. Robins, A. Rotnitzky, and L. P. Zhao. Estimation of regression coefficients when some
regressors are not always observed. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 89(427):
846-866, 1994.
[51] J. M. Robins, M. A. Hernan, and B. Brumback. Marginal structural models and causal inference
in epidemiology. Epidemiology, 11(5):550-560, 2000.
[52] M. Schröder, V. Melnychuk, and S. Feuerriegel. Differentially private learners for heterogeneous
treatment effects. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[53] B. Shahriari, K. Swersky, Z. Wang, R. P. Adams, and N. De Freitas. Taking the human out of
the loop: A review of Bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):148-175, 2016.
[54] N. Shazeer, A. Mirhoseini, K. Maziarz, A. Davis, Q. Le, G. Hinton, and J. Dean. Outrageously
large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
[55] J. Snoek, H. Larochelle, and R. P. Adams. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning
algorithms. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2012.
[56] N. Srinivas, A. Krause, S. M. Kakade, and M. Seeger. Gaussian process optimization in the
bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2010.
[57] L. Tani and C. Veelken. Comparison of Bayesian and particle swarm algorithms for hyper-
parameter optimisation in machine learning applications in high energy physics. Computer
Physics Communications, 294:108955, 2024.
[58] A. Törn and A. Žilinskas. Global optimization, volume 350. Springer, 1989.
[59] R. Turner, D. Eriksson, M. McCourt, J. Kiili, E. Laaksonen, Z. Xu, and I. Guyon. Bayesian
optimization is superior to random search for machine learning hyperparameter tuning: Analysis
of the black-box optimization challenge 2020. In NeurIPS Competition and Demonstration
Track, 2020.
[60] M. J. Van Der Laan and D. Rubin. Targeted maximum likelihood learning. The International
Journal of Biostatistics, 2, 2006.
[61] Z. Wang and S. Jegelka. Max-value entropy search for efficient Bayesian optimization. In
International conference on machine learning, pages 3627-3635. PMLR, 2017.
[62] S. Watanabe. Tree-structured parzen estimator: Understanding its algorithm components and
their roles for better empirical performance. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2304.11127, 2023.
[63] J. Wilson, F. Hutter, and M. Deisenroth. Maximizing acquisition functions for Bayesian
optimization. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
[64] J. T. Wilson, R. Moriconi, F. Hutter, and M. P. Deisenroth. The reparameterization trick for
acquisition functions. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1712.00424, 2017.
[65] J. Wu, S. Toscano-Palmerin, P. I. Frazier, and A. G. Wilson. Practical multi-fidelity Bayesian
optimization for hyperparameter tuning. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2020.
[66] M.-J. Wu, J.-S. R. Jang, and J.-L. Chen. Wafer map failure pattern recognition and similarity
ranking for large-scale data sets. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 28(1):
1-12, 2015.
[67] Y. Yuan, W. Wang, and W. Pang. A systematic comparison study on hyperparameter optimisation
of graph neural networks for molecular property prediction. In Proceedings of the genetic and
evolutionary computation conference, 2021.
A
Extended related work
Below, we discuss more distant related literature, completing the discussion in Section 2. We first
cover literature regarding the robustness of the three components of BO in our work, and finally
present related work on orthogonal machine learning.
Marginalization over surrogate uncertainty. A standard source of instability in BO is uncertainty
in the surrogate itself, especially in the hyperparameters such as kernel lengthscales. Prior work has
emphasized that a fully Bayesian treatment of these hyperparameters can substantially improve ro-
bustness relative to empirical Bayes or plug-in optimization [55]. Related work has also incorporated
hyperparameter uncertainty directly into acquisition design [29, 30]. While these approaches account
for surrogate uncertainty by integrating over posterior uncertainty in the model, they do not directly
address the additional MC instability that arises when the resulting acquisition value must itself be
estimated.
Ensemble surrogates and model aggregation. A natural strategy for mitigating surrogate mis-
specification is to replace a single surrogate with an ensemble of surrogate models. Recent work
has proposed GP ensembles and mixture-based surrogate models for BO, showing that combining
multiple kernels or surrogate classes can improve robustness relative to committing to a single GP
prior [38, 48]. These approaches address only structural misspecification at the model level and do
not account for instability in the individual surrogates.
Acquisition functions and numerical stability. Acquisition functions are the core decision rule
in BO, with classical choices including Probability of Improvement, Expected Improvement, and
upper-confidence-based methods [34, 56]. Recent work has highlighted that vanilla EI and its variants
can be numerically unstable, which can substantially degrade optimization performance [2]. This has
motivated numerically stable reformulations based on the logarithmic scale, which are substantially
easier to optimize in practice.
Orthogonal machine learning. Orthogonal machine learning is rooted in semi-parametric statistics
[9], and is applied in many settings where the estimation target is defined based on unknown nuisance
components [12, 20]. Very common examples are found in the missing data analysis [50] and causal
inference literature [35, 46, 47, 51, 60]. Recently, orthogonal learning has also been expanded to
other fields such as private machine learning [52], survival analysis [21], LLM evaluation [22], and
general ML optimization topics such as neural operators or generative models [31, 41].
B
Failure modes in Bayesian Optimization
Failure modes in BO. Several failure modes arise in a realistic HPO setting (see, e.g., [e.g. 2, 8,
11, 45]). Bayesian HPO performance depends on the accuracy and stability of acquisition estimates,
which are computed from a surrogate posterior that is often misspecified and approximately inferred,
leading to instability in acquisition values. Specifically, BO suffers from the following main failure
modes:
(i) Structural surrogate misspecification arises when the surrogate model class does not adequately
represent the unknown objective. For example, the assumed kernel, likelihood, prior smoothness, or
stationary structure may be incompatible with the true response surface. As a result, the posterior
mean and posterior uncertainty estimates may be systematically biased.
(ii) Numerical instability can arise when acquisition values are very small, highly skewed, or nearly
indistinguishable across candidates. Directly optimizing such quantities can lead to unstable gradients.
(iii) Posterior approximation and acquisition estimation noise. Marginalizing over surrogate uncer-
tainty mitigates plug-in overconfidence, but the marginal acquisition value must be approximated
from a finite number of posterior samples. This introduces Monte Carlo variance into the acquisition
estimate, on top of any bias from the approximate posterior qm,t itself differing from the true posterior.
Both effects can negatively affect the ranking of candidate points.
C
Extension to constrained and parallel acquisitions
In Section 4, we develop an orthogonalized estimator for the standard Expected Improvement setting.
The same construction extends to a broader class of acquisition functions, including constrained
EI, parallel or batch EI, and their combinations. Below, we first provide a general extension to our
standard EI setting in the main paper and then specialize it to constrained and parallel Bayesian
optimization.
C.1
General acquisition-level extension
Let z denote a generic acquisition input. Depending on the setting, we write z to represent (i) a single
candidate point λ in standard BO, (ii) a single candidate point λ in constrained BO, or (iii) a batch
Λ = (λ1, . . . , λq) in parallel BO.
For surrogate model m with parameter θm and approximate posterior qm,t(θ), let am(z; θm) denote a
generic acquisition function computed under parameter value θm. We define the marginal acquisition
target
Am(z) := Eθm∼qm,t[am(z; θm)] .
(25)
As in Section 4, let gm(θm) := ∇θm log qm,t(θm) denote the score function. With θ(s)
m
i.i.d.
∼qm,t the
orthogonalized estimator is given by
bAorth
m
(z) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
h
am(z; θ(s)
m ) −
 Cov(gm, gm)−1 Cov(gm, am)
⊤gm(θ(s)
m )
i
.
(26)
Proposition C.1 (Generic extension of the orthogonalized estimator). Fix an iteration t, a surrogate
model m, and an acquisition input z. Assume that
Eqm,t

∥gm(θm)∥2

< ∞,
Eqm,t

am(θm; z)2
< ∞,
(27)
and that Cov(gm, gm) is nonsingular. Then:
1. bAorth
m
(z) is unbiased for Am(z)
2.
Var

bAorth
m
(z)

= 1
S
 Var(hm) −Cov(hm, gm)⊤Cov(gm, gm)−1 Cov(gm, hm)

, (28)
and therefore
Var

bAorth
m
(z)

≤Var

bAMC
m (z)

,
(29)
where bAMC
m (z) := 1
S
PS
s=1 hm(θ(s)
m ; z)
3. The residual rm(θm; z) := am(θm; z) −
 Cov(gm, gm)−1 Cov(gm, am)
⊤gm(θm) is or-
thogonal to the score directions.
Proof. The proof is identical to that of the EI case in Supplement E after replacing EIm(λ; θm) by
the generic acquisition value am(z; θm).
Remark.
Proposition C.1 shows that the theoretical properties of our orthogonalized approach are
acquisition-agnostic. We only require square integrability of the acquisition value under qm,t and the
usual score-function regularity conditions.
C.2
Constrained Expected Improvement
Consider constrained BO with one objective f1 and constraint functions f2, . . . , fM, where, without
loss of generality, the feasible set is defined by
fi(λ) ≤0,
i = 2, . . . , M.
(30)
A standard constrained Expected Improvement (CEI) acquisition is
CEIm(λ; θm) := E
"
(f ⋆−f1(λ))+
M
Y
i=2
1{fi(λ) ≤0}
 Dt, θm
#
,
(31)
where f ⋆denotes the current best feasible objective value (i.e., the minimum of f1 over feasible
observations).
The corresponding marginal target is CEImarg
m
(λ)
:=
Eθm∼qm,t[CEIm(λ; θm)].
Defining
hCEI
m (θm; λ) := CEIm(λ; θm), the orthogonalized CEI estimator is given by
d
CEI
orth
m
(λ) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
h
CEIm(λ; θ(s)
m ) −
 Cov(gm, gm)−1 Cov
 gm, hCEI
m
⊤gm(θ(s)
m )
i
.
(32)
Corollary C.2 (Orthogonalized constrained EI). Assume Eqm,t
h
(CEIm(λ; θm))2i
< ∞. Then
Proposition C.1 applies with am(z; θm) = CEIm(λ; θm).
Proof. The indicator product is bounded by 1, so 0 ≤CEIm(λ; θm) ≤EIm,1(λ; θm) :=
E[(f ⋆−f1(λ))+ | Dt, θm]. Square integrability of EIm,1 thus implies square integrability of CEIm,
and the corollary follows from Proposition C.1.
C.3
Parallel or batch Expected Improvement
In parallel BO, we select a batch Λ = (λ1, . . . , λq) of q candidate points at each iteration. The
standard batch expected improvement (qEI) is given by
qEIm(Λ; θm) := E

max
j=1,...,q
 f ⋆−f(λj)

+
 Dt, θm

,
(33)
with corresponding marginal target is qEImarg
m
(Λ) := Eθm∼qm,t[qEIm(Λ; θm)].
We define hqEI
m (θm; Λ) := qEIm(Λ; θm). Then the orthogonalized qEI estimator is given by
d
qEI
orth
m
(Λ) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
h
qEIm(Λ; θ(s)
m ) −
 Cov(gm, gm)−1 Cov
 gm, hqEI
m
⊤gm(θ(s)
m )
i
.
(34)
Corollary C.3 (Orthogonalized batch EI). Assume Eqm,t
h
(qEIm(Λ; θm))2i
< ∞. Then Proposi-
tion C.1 applies with am(z; θm) = qEIm(Λ; θm).
Proof. Observe that for every fixed batch X
= (x1, . . . , xq) and parameter value θ, 0 ≤
qEIm(X; θ) ≤Pq
j=1 EIm(xj; θ). Consequently, qEIm(X; θ)2 ≤
Pq
j=1 EIm(xj; θ)
2
. In par-
ticular, if Eθ∼qm,t
Pq
j=1 EIm(xj; θ)
2
< ∞, then as well Eθ∼qm,t

qEIm(X; θ)2
< ∞. The
corollary now directly follows from Proposition C.1.
Unlike standard EI, qEI does not admit a closed-form expression. Therefore, we follow common
practice and approximate it by inner MC sampling. Let
d
qEIm(Λ; θm) = 1
N
N
X
n=1
max
j=1,...,q
 f ⋆−ξ(n)(λj)

+,
ξ(n) ∼p(· | Dt, θm),
(35)
where the inner MC estimator is assumed to be unbiased for qEIm(Λ; θm).
The resulting orthogonalized MC estimator is then given by
d
qEI
orth
m,nested(Λ) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
h
d
qEIm(Λ; θ(s)
m ) −(Cov(gm, gm)−1 Cov(gm, d
qEI(Λ; θm)))⊤gm(θ(s)
m )
i
.
(36)
Importantly, under the assumption that the inner estimator (35) is unbiased for qEIm(X; θm) for
every fixed θm, and that all required second moments exist, then d
qEI
orth
m,nested(Λ) is unbiased for
qEIm(X; θm) as well due to the law of iterated expectations.
D
Theoretical properties
D.1
Computational Complexity
GP surrogate. For an exact GP surrogate, fitting requires O(t3) time due to kernel matrix inversion.
Per candidate λ, computing µt(λ; θ) and σ2
t (λ; θ) for a fixed θ costs O(t2) in a naive implementation,
or O(t) if Cholesky factors are reused appropriately. For S posterior samples, marginal EI estimation
costs O(St2) or O(St), depending on the implementation.
The orthogonalization step introduces two types of cost. First, once per BO iteration, one computes
the score covariance matrix bΣg := d
Cov(gt, gt) ∈Rdθ×dθ, which depends only on the surrogate
posterior samples and not on the candidate λ. This costs O(Sd2
θ), followed by O(d3
θ) to invert or
factorize bΣg. Second, for each candidate λ, one computes the cross-covariance vector bcgh(λ) :=
d
Cov(gt, h(·; λ)), which costs O(Sdθ), followed by O(d2
θ) for a matrix-vector solve or multiplication
with the precomputed factorization of bΣ−1
g . Hence, the additional per-candidate orthogonalization
overhead is O(Sdθ + d2
θ), and the total per-candidate cost is O(St2 + Sdθ + d2
θ), plus a one-time
per-iteration preprocessing cost of O(Sd2
θ + d3
θ).
We compare the average per-step runtimes of ORTHOBO with qLogEI in Table 3. We observe that
the runtimes vary with the dimensionality of the problem, but the overhead over MC-based qLogEI
is often around 2 s. For our implementation, we used the BoTorch framework, which has made
MC-sampling highly efficient. We thus expect further runtime reductions from a more improved
orthogonalization implementation.
Table 3: Average per-step runtimes (in seconds) for ORTHOBO and qLogEI.
Hartmann6
Ackley8
Michalewicz10
Levy16
qLogEI
0.696
0.156
0.325
0.582
ORTHOBO
1.607
0.492
2.362
2.563
Tree-based / TPE-style surrogate. Tree-based or density-based surrogates are typically cheaper
to fit. A single fit often requires O(t log t) or comparable cost, depending on the underlying model.
Per-candidate acquisition evaluation is usually O(1) or logarithmic in t. As in the GP case, the
covariance matrix of the control variate, bΣc := d
Cov(ct, ct) ∈Rdc×dc, depends only on the posterior
samples and can therefore be computed once per BO iteration at cost O(Sd2
c), followed by O(d3
c)
for inversion or factorization. For each candidate, one then computes the cross-covariance vector
bcch(λ) := d
Cov(ct, h(·; λ)), at cost O(Sdc), followed by O(d2
c) for the matrix-vector solve. Hence,
the additional per-candidate orthogonalization overhead is O(Sdc + d2
c), with one-time per-iteration
preprocessing cost O(Sd2
c + d3
c).
We report average per-step runtimes for orthogonalized TPE versus MC-based TPE in Table 4.
Runtime differences are generally small.
Table 4: Average per-step runtimes (in seconds) for ORTHOBO and MC-based TPE.
Hartmann6
Ackley8
Michalewicz10
Levy16
MC-TPE
0.224
0.347
0.356
0.754
ORTHOBO
0.390
0.736
2.533
0.360
Ensemble overhead. For an ensemble of M surrogate models, the total cost scales linearly as
O
PM
m=1 costm

. In practice, the main computational advantage of debiasing through orthogonal-
ization is not that it makes each acquisition evaluation cheaper, but that it can achieve comparable
acquisition stability with a smaller MC budget S.
D.2
Variance reduction, robustness and ranking stability for GP and TPE
We provide versions of Theorem 4.1, and Proposition 4.3 for the two surrogate instantiations GP
and TPE. The proofs follow directly from the proofs of the original theorem and proposition in
Supplement E.
Theorem D.1 (Variance reduction for the GP surrogate). Fix an iteration t and a candidate λ ∈Λ.
Assume Eqt∥gt(θ)∥2
2 < ∞, Eqt[(EIGP(λ; θ))2] < ∞, and that Cov(gt, gt) is nonsingular. Define
EIGP,orth(λ; θ) := EIGP(λ; θ) −γGP(λ)⊤gt(θ).
(37)
Then:
(i) Target preservation: Eqt[EIGP,orth(λ; θ)] = EIGP,marg(λ).
(ii) Variance reduction:
Var
 EIGP,orth(λ; θ)

= Var
 EIGP(λ; θ)

−Cov(EIGP, gt)⊤Cov(gt, gt)−1 Cov(gt, EIGP),
(38)
and therefore Var(EIGP,orth(λ; θ)) ≤Var(EIGP(λ; θ)). By the i.i.d. MC variance identity, the
corresponding estimator satisfies Var(c
EI
GP,orth(λ)) ≤Var(c
EI
GP,MC(λ)) for any MC budget S.
Proposition D.2 (Ranking stability for the GP surrogate). Let λ, λ′ ∈Λ with ∆GP(λ, λ′) :=
EIGP,marg(λ)−EIGP,marg(λ′) > 0. Let b∆GP,orth denote the MC estimator obtained by applying the
orthogonalization construction in Theorem D.1 to the difference functional EIGP(λ; θ)−EIGP(λ′; θ).
Then
P

b∆GP,orth ≤0

≤Var(b∆GP,orth)
(∆GP(λ, λ′))2 ≤Var(b∆GP,MC)
(∆GP(λ, λ′))2 .
(39)
Theorem D.3 (Variance reduction for the tree-based / TPE-style surrogate). Fix an iteration t and a
candidate λ ∈Λ. Assume Eqt[∥ct(θ)∥2
2] < ∞, Eqt[(hTPE(λ; θ))2] < ∞, Eqt[ct(θ)] = 0, and that
Cov(ct, ct) is nonsingular. Define
hTPE,orth(λ; θ) := hTPE(λ; θ) −γTPE(λ)⊤ct(θ).
(40)
Then:
(i) Target preservation: Eqt[hTPE,orth(λ; θ)] = EITPE,marg(λ).
(ii) Variance reduction:
Var
 hTPE,orth(λ; θ)

= Var
 hTPE(λ; θ)

−Cov(hTPE, ct)⊤Cov(ct, ct)−1 Cov(ct, hTPE),
(41)
and therefore Var(hTPE,orth(λ; θ)) ≤Var(hTPE(λ; θ)). By the i.i.d. MC variance identity, the
corresponding estimator satisfies Var(c
EI
TPE,orth(λ)) ≤Var(c
EI
TPE,MC(λ)) for any MC budget S.
Proposition D.4 (Ranking stability for the tree-based / TPE-style surrogate). Let λ, λ′ ∈Λ with
∆TPE(λ, λ′) := EITPE,marg(λ) −EITPE,marg(λ′) > 0. Let b∆TPE,orth denote the MC estimator
obtained by applying the orthogonalization construction in Theorem D.3 to the difference functional
hTPE(λ; θ) −hTPE(λ′; θ). Then
P

b∆TPE,orth ≤0

≤Var(b∆TPE,orth)
(∆TPE(λ, λ′))2 ≤Var(b∆TPE,MC)
(∆TPE(λ, λ′))2 .
(42)
E
Proofs of the main theorems and propositions
E.1
Proof of Theorem 4.1
Theorem 4.1 Assume Eqm,t[EIm(λ; θ)2] < ∞and Eqm,t[∥g(θ)∥2
2] < ∞, that Σg is nonsingular, and
that the standard score-function regularity conditions hold for qm,t. Then:
(i) Preserved target. EIorth,marg
m
(λ) = EImarg
m
(λ).
(ii) Variance reduction. Under qm,t,
Var
 EIorth
m
(λ; θ)

= Var
 EIm(λ; θ)

−Cov(g, EIm)⊤Σ−1
g
Cov(g, EIm) ≤Var
 EIm(λ; θ)

.
(43)
Proof. Let h(θ) := EIm(λ; θ) and g(θ) := ∇θ log qm,t(θ), and write γ := γm(λ) = Σ−1
g
Cov(g, h).
Then
EIorth
m
(λ; θ) = h(θ) −γ⊤g(θ).
(44)
(i) Preserved target.
Under the assumed regularity conditions, the score function satisfies
Eqm,t[g(θ)] =
Z
∇θ log qm,t(θ) qm,t(θ) dθ =
Z
∇θqm,t(θ) dθ = 0.
(45)
Hence
EIorth,marg
m
(λ) = Eqm,t[h(θ)] −γ⊤Eqm,t[g(θ)] = Eqm,t[h(θ)] = EImarg
m
(λ).
(46)
(ii) Variance reduction.
For any a ∈Rdθ,
Varqm,t(h −a⊤g) = Var(h) −2a⊤Cov(g, h) + a⊤Σg a.
(47)
Since Σg is positive definite by assumption, this quadratic in a is uniquely minimized at
a⋆= Σ−1
g
Cov(g, h) = γ.
(48)
Substituting a = γ gives
Var
 EIorth
m
(λ; θ)

= Var(h) −Cov(g, h)⊤Σ−1
g
Cov(g, h).
(49)
Because Σg is positive definite, the quadratic form Cov(g, h)⊤Σ−1
g
Cov(g, h) ≥0, and therefore
Var
 EIorth
m
(λ; θ)

≤Var
 EIm(λ; θ)

.
(50)
E.2
Proof of Corollary 4.2
Corollary 4.2 Assume the conditions of Theorem 4.1. For any b ∈Rdθ, consider the tilted family
q(ε)
m,t(θ) ∝qm,t(θ) exp
 ε b⊤g(θ)

for small |ε|. Holding γm(λ) fixed at its ε = 0 value, it holds that
d
dε Eq(ε)
m,t
h
EIorth
m
(λ; θ)
i
ε=0
= 0.
(51)
Proof. Throughout, we hold γ fixed at its ε = 0 value. Consider the exponentially tilted family
q(ε)
m,t(θ) = qm,t(θ) exp(ε b⊤g(θ))
Z(ε)
,
Z(ε) =
Z
qm,t(θ) exp(ε b⊤g(θ)) dθ.
(52)
For any integrable test function φ, differentiation under the integral sign (justified by the square-
integrability assumptions and dominated convergence in a neighborhood of ε = 0) yields
d
dε Eq(ε)
m,t[φ(θ)]

ε=0
= Covqm,t
 φ(θ), b⊤g(θ)

.
(53)
Apply with φ(θ) = EIorth
m
(λ; θ) = h(θ) −γ⊤g(θ):
Cov
 g, h −γ⊤g

= Cov(g, h) −Σg γ = Cov(g, h) −ΣgΣ−1
g
Cov(g, h) = 0.
(54)
Hence
d
dε Eq(ε)
m,t
h
EIorth
m
(λ; θ)
i
ε=0
= b⊤Cov
 g, h −γ⊤g

= 0
(55)
for every b ∈Rdθ. The orthogonalized acquisition is therefore first-order insensitive to score-tilt
perturbations of qm,t.
E.3
Proof of Proposition 4.3
Proposition 4.3 Let λ, λ′ ∈Λ such that ∆(λ, λ′) := EImarg
m
(λ) −EImarg
m
(λ′) > 0. Let b∆MC(λ, λ′)
and b∆orth(λ, λ′) denote the corresponding Monte Carlo difference estimators. Then both estimators
are unbiased for ∆(λ, λ′), and
P

b∆orth(λ, λ′) ≤0

≤
Var

b∆orth(λ, λ′)

Var

b∆orth(λ, λ′)

+ ∆(λ, λ′)2 ≤
Var

b∆MC(λ, λ′)

Var

b∆MC(λ, λ′)

+ ∆(λ, λ′)2 .
(56)
Proof. By unbiasedness from Theorem 4.1,
E
h
b∆orth(λ, λ′)
i
= ∆(λ, λ′).
(57)
Hence
P
 b∆orth(λ, λ′) ≤0

= P

b∆orth(λ, λ′) −∆(λ, λ′) ≤−∆(λ, λ′)

.
(58)
Applying Cantelli’s inequality to the centered random variable
Z := b∆orth(λ, λ′) −∆(λ, λ′)
(59)
gives
P(Z ≤−a) ≤
Var(Z)
Var(Z) + a2 ,
a > 0.
(60)
With a = ∆(λ, λ′), this yields
P
 b∆orth(λ, λ′) ≤0

≤
Var

b∆orth(λ, λ′)

Var

b∆orth(λ, λ′)

+ ∆(λ, λ′)2 .
(61)
The second inequality follows from Theorem 4.1, which gives
Var

b∆orth(λ, λ′)

≤Var

b∆MC(λ, λ′)

.
(62)
Since the map v 7→v/(v + ∆2) is increasing for v ≥0, the result follows.
F
Implementation details
General implementation details All experiments were conducted on a proprietary compute cluster.
Our experiments utilized 4 CPU cores, 16 GB of main memory, and a A100 MIG slice with 7GB
of VRAM. We used BoTorch for all code implementations. In total, we use ∼1000 GPU hours
including initial experimentation and bug fixing.
License details We used BoTorch, which is MIT licensed. We implemented all methods and
benchmarks in this framework. The WM811K dataset [33, 66] is available at 
org/dataSet/public/ and allows usage under the following conditions (copied verbatim from the
license document):
2. Redistribution and use in any form must be
accompanied by the following two citations:
[1] Ming-Ju Wu, Jyh-Shing Roger Jang, and Jui-Long Chen,
"Wafer Map Failure Pattern Recognition and
Similarity Ranking for Large-Scale Data Sets,"
in IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1-12, Feb. 2015, doi: 10.1109/TSM.2014.2364237.
[2] MIR-WM811K: Dataset for wafer map failure pattern recognition,
2015 
We included these citations at the appropriate places. Further, we received written permission by the
authors to use the dataset for our research.
F.1
TPE implementation
TPE implementation.
For the TPE-based experiments, we approximate the parameter distribution
qt(θ) by a nonparametric bootstrap over the current BO history. Concretely, for each sample
s = 1, . . . , S, we resample the observed data with replacement, fit a TPE surrogate θ(s), and evaluate
the corresponding TPE acquisition
hTPE(λ; θ(s)) ∝ℓθ(s)(λ)
gθ(s)(λ).
We use the empirical γ-quantile split with γ = 0.2 to define the good and bad sets.
As control variate, we use centered bootstrap summary statistics. For each bootstrap fit θ(s), we form
ϕ(θ(s)) =

log b(s)
good,1, . . . , log b(s)
good,d, log b(s)
bad,1, . . . , log b(s)
bad,d, y⋆,(s)⊤,
where b(s)
good,j and b(s)
bad,j are the fitted KDE bandwidths in dimension j, and y⋆,(s) is the bootstrap
split threshold. The implemented control variate is then
ct(θ(s)) = ϕ(θ(s)) −1
S
S
X
r=1
ϕ(θ(r)),
which is zero-mean by construction. The orthogonalized TPE estimator is
c
EI
c
TPE,orth(λ) = 1
S
S
X
s=1

hTPE(λ; θ(s)) −γTPE(λ)⊤ct(θ(s))

.
F.2
Misspecified kernel family experiments
F.3
CNN outlier experiment
We include the CNN outlier experiment used by Ament et al. [3]. Specifically, the goal is to optimize
the test-set accuracy of a CNN trained on MNIST images. To model corrupted evaluations, we
Function
Qualitative structure
Kernel family
Reason for
misspecification
Mildly
misspecified
Strongly
misspecified
Hartmann6
Smooth, anisotropic,
interaction-heavy,
multimodal
Isotropic RBF
or isotropic
Matérn
Linear
Isotropic kernel
variants miss
dimension-specific
lengthscales. Linear
kernels cannot capture
the nonlinear
multimodal structure.
Ackley8
Highly multimodal,
oscillatory, with many
local minima
Smooth RBF
Linear
Very smooth kernels
tend to smear out
Ackley’s rugged local
structure. Linear
kernels are too simple
for the landscape.
Michalewicz10
Sharp valleys, strong
multimodality, narrow
optima
Isotropic RBF
or Matérn
Linear
Isotropic kernels blur
the narrow valleys and
local optima. Linear
kernels are strongly
misspecified.
Levy16
Rugged, oscillatory,
with nonlinear
interactions
Overly smooth
isotropic RBF
Linear
Isotropic smooth
kernels underfit
sharper local variation
and ignore anisotropy.
Linear kernels cannot
represent the
nonlinear oscillatory
structure.
Table 5: Synthetic benchmark functions, their qualitative structure, and examples of mildly and
strongly misspecified kernel families.
prematurely stop training with probability 20 % after observing between 100 and 1000 training
samples. We optimize the same parameters as Ament et al. [3]. For comparison, we also include their
RPR method. To not implicitly mitigate the corrupted evaluations, we only use n0 = 2 initial points.
In initial experiments, we found that using larger n0 made the problem too easy for all methods; all
reached ∼100 % test accuracy after few iterations.
F.4
Case study experiment, additional details
Dataset. For our real-world case study, we use the large-scale industrial WM811K dataset [33, 66].
It contains 811 457 real-world wafer map images and annotations of common failure types. The
images have pixel values 0, 1, 2, where 0 is background, 1 are OK regions, and 2 are faulty regions.
Depending on the clustering of the failures, one of eight class labels is assigned. Exemplary failure
patterns are shown in Figure 6. Images without any failures are labelled with an additional class label.
We resize all wafer maps to a common (48 × 48) resolution, rescale the data to (0, 1) by dividing by
/2, and then normalize using ImageNet statistics.
The dataset is strongly imbalanced, and we randomly split the data into a 80 % train and 20 % test set,
stratifying on the labels to keep class distributions equal across the two splits. During fine-tuning, we
use an (inverse) class-weighted cross-entropy loss.
Model. As a model, we use an ImageNet [13] pretrained ViT B16 [14] model. We freeze the
backbone model and train only the penultimate output layers.
Center
Donut
Edge-Loc
Edge-Ring
Loc
Random
Scratch
Near-full
Figure 6: Examples of wafer-map manufacturing failures.
Experimental settings. For this experiment, due to computational constraints, we deviate from the
settings used in the main paper. Specifically, we here use S = 512, n0 = 4, and run four trials of 20
iterations. We use a RBF kernel.
Problem. The goal is to optimize the fine-tuning test accuracy of a pretrained ViT B16 model on the
industrial WM811K dataset. The tunable parameters are: learning rate in [1e −4, 1e −1], momentum
in [0, 1], weight decay in [0, 1], step size (for the learning rate scheduling) in [1, 100], and γ ∈[0, 1].7
7This experiment conceptually builds on Ament et al.’s experiment on CNN training.
G
Further results
G.1
Variance reduction and ranking stability
We estimate the empirical macro variance of the acquisition estimator by fixing a BO state, drawing
a fixed set of n = 64 Sobol probe samples, rebuilding the acquisition independently 16 times, and
computing the sample variance across repeated estimator values at each probe point. We report the
mean pointwise macro variance for the raw and orthogonalized estimators. (Note: this does not affect
the fitted surrogate model, which stays untouched). We repeat this at fixed points throughout training.
Due to space reasons, we only report abridged results in the main text. We report results for (i) a
Matérn-5/2 kernel in section G.1.1, (ii) a RBF kernel in section G.1.2, and (iii) a TPE surrogate in
section G.1.3.
G.1.1
Matérn-5/2 kernel
In Table 6, we give the variance reduction of ORTHOBO for all benchmark functions. For higher-
dimensional Michalewicz10 and Levy16, we found that larger n0 were required Across all bench-
marks, we observe a strong reduction in variance, confirming that our proposed ORTHOBO stabilizes
the acquisition estimate. Further, we report the ranking stabilities in Table 7, We observe that
ORTHOBO again reduces the variance and consistently stabilizes the probe ranking.
Table 6: Variance reduction by orthogonalization.
Hartmann6
Ackley8
Michalewicz10
Levy16
n0
S
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
8
2e-08
1.61e-07
9.68e-09
5.24e-09
9.51e-08
4.54e-08
0.00106
0.000709
32
2.59e-09
3.02e-10
6.3e-09
4.17e-10
1.67e-08
1.07e-09
0.000208
2.27e-05
Table 7: Ranking stability. Lower probe variance and flip rate indicate more stable acquisition
estimates; higher ranking correlation and top-1 agreement indicate more stable candidate rankings
across probes.
Benchmark
Method
Probe variance
Top1 agr.
Flip rate
Regret
Hartmann6
qLogEI
8.41615.43
0.9250.16
0.1140.12
1.4110.42
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0380.04
0.9500.10
0.0510.04
1.2320.67
Ackley8
qLogEI
19.47139.29
0.9580.11
0.1020.12
17.8642.08
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0170.04
0.9860.06
0.0210.05
18.1360.78
Michalewicz10
qLogEI
168.603154.76
0.9250.16
0.1480.12
7.1400.01
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0190.03
0.9880.06
0.0140.03
6.9610.36
Levy16
qLogEI
233.655287.67
0.9170.12
0.0690.09
82.1946.05
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0730.21
0.9880.06
0.0480.04
58.9380.00
G.1.2
RBF kernel
We repeat our previous analysis, but use RBF kernel for the GP surrogate. We report the raw and
orthogonalized variances in Table 8. Our observations are consistent: orthogonalization substantially
reduces estimation variance.
Table 8: Variance reduction through orthogonalization, using a RBF kernel.
Hartmann6
Ackley8
Michalewicz10
Levy16
n0
S
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
Var(c
EI
MC
m )
Var(c
EI
ortho
m
)
8
5.91e-08
1.91e-07
1.28e-08
7.19e-09
1.15e-07
4.56e-08
0.00129
0.000758
32
8.62e-09
7.3e-10
3.71e-09
4e-10
2.61e-08
1.76e-09
0.000301
2.85e-05
Table 9: Ranking stability, RBF kernel. Lower probe variance and flip rate indicate more stable
acquisition estimates; higher ranking correlation and top-1 agreement indicate more stable candidate
rankings across probes.
Benchmark
Method
Probe variance
Top1 agr.
Flip rate
Regret
Hartmann6
qLogEI
5.37311.64
0.9440.15
0.0850.10
0.1260.00
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0310.04
0.9860.08
0.0310.04
0.1250.00
Ackley8
qLogEI
10.05131.34
0.9860.06
0.0520.10
12.4762.06
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0130.04
0.9930.04
0.0190.04
12.5814.03
Michalewicz10
qLogEI
55.138100.54
0.9310.15
0.0850.09
4.5170.20
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0020.01
1.0000.00
0.0310.04
4.0040.52
Levy16
qLogEI
82.913154.71
0.8890.18
0.2010.10
3.1090.57
OrthoBO (ours)
0.0340.17
1.0000.00
0.0490.04
2.8190.57
G.1.3
TPE-based surrogate
In Table 10, we show the variance reduction from ORTHOBO for a TPE surrogate, using a MC budget
of S = 32. Our observations are in line with the GP surrogate: ORTHOBO can substantially reduce
the variance.
Table 10: Variance reduction by orthogonalization, for a TPE surrogate.
Hartmann6
Ackley8
Michalewicz10
Levy16
Var(EITPE)
Var(c
EITPE,orth)
Var(EITPE)
Var(c
EITPE,orth)
Var(EITPE)
Var(c
EITPE,orth)
Var(EITPE)
Var(c
EITPE,orth)
11.22216.405
1.2142.620
13.18218.233
1.2842.601
21.71225.982
2.1973.358
20.94426.200
1.3992.259
G.2
Misspecified surrogate families
We first study robustness to surrogate misspecification. In practical BO, the surrogate family is
only an approximation to the unknown objective, and kernel hyperparameters are often estimated
from limited data. As a result, the posterior quantities used inside MC acquisition estimates can
be noisy or biased, which may destabilize candidate rankings. This experiment evaluates whether
the variance reduction induced by ORTHOBO improves BO decisions under such challenging, but
realistic, surrogate conditions.
We consider four standard synthetic regression problems with known global optima and varying
dimensionality: Hartmann6, Ackley8, Michalewicz10, and Levy16 [e.g., 2, 10, 15, 43]. Details of
the benchmark functions and surrogate choices are provided in Table 5. We compare methods using
best-so-far regret.
Mild misspecification: isotropic RBF kernel. We first use an isotropic RBF kernel, a common
smooth GP prior. For anisotropic and multimodal objectives it is mildly misspecified because it uses
a single lengthscale across all dimensions. (The dimension of the benchmark functions varies from 6
to 16.) The results are in Fig. 7.
25
75
125
175
Iteration
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Best-so-far regret
Hartmann6
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
TuRBO
UCB
25
75
125
175
Iteration
14
18
Best-so-far regret
Ackley8
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
TuRBO
UCB
25
75
125
175
Iteration
5
7
Best-so-far regret
Michalewicz10
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
TuRBO
UCB
25
75
125
175
Iteration
20
60
Best-so-far regret
Levy16
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
TuRBO
UCB
Figure 7: Best-so-far regret as a function of iterations on four widely used regression problems,
using a mildly misspecified isotropic RBF kernel. Our proposed ORTHOBO is competitive, and in
higher-dimensional functions (Michalewicz10, Levy16) outperforms the baselines.
Results. Under mild surrogate misspecification, our proposed ORTHOBO remains competitive across
all benchmarks. On Hartmann6 and Ackley8, it improves over qLogEI and reaches the lowest regret.
On the higher-dimensional Michalewicz10 and Levy16 functions, ORTHOBO achieves the lowest
regret and improves substantially earlier than the baselines. For example, ORTHOBO reaches a regret
of ∼5 after 5 iterations, whereas the baseline methods require at least 50 to 60 additional iterations.
Together, these results indicate that variance reduction at the acquisition-estimation level improves
the reliability of BO decisions under realistic surrogate mismatch, with the largest gains appearing in
higher-dimensional settings where candidate rankings are more sensitive to estimation noise.
Strong misspecification: linear kernel. We next consider a more challenging setting by using a
linear kernel. This surrogate is unable to represent the nonlinear and multimodal structure of the
benchmark functions, which amplifies the effect of posterior and acquisition-estimation errors. We
therefore test whether stabilizing the acquisition estimate can still improve BO decisions when the
surrogate family is substantially imperfect. The results are shown in Fig. 8.
25
75
125
175
Iteration
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Best-so-far regret
Hartmann6
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
UCB
25
75
125
175
Iteration
18.5
19.0
19.5
20.0
Best-so-far regret
Ackley8
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
UCB
25
75
125
175
Iteration
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
Best-so-far regret
Michalewicz10
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
UCB
25
75
125
175
Iteration
60
80
100
Best-so-far regret
Levy16
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
UCB
Figure 8: Best-so-far regret as a function of iterations on four widely used regression problems, using
a strongly misspecified linear kernel. Our proposed ORTHOBO substantially outperforms other
methods. The performance difference increases as the problem dimensionality grows. Notably, on
Hartmann6, qLogEI takes five times more iterations than ORTHOBO to reach the same level of regret.
Results. We observe: (i) On all regression problems, our ORTHOBO outperforms the baselines. (ii)
on Hartmann6, ORTHOBO reaches the same regret as qLogEI in half the time. (iii) On Levy16,
ORTHOBO is the only method to substantially improve over time. Together, the results demonstrate
the orthogonalization can successfully overcome strong misspecifications of the surrogate family.
With the strongly misspecified linear kernel, ORTHOBO outperforms the baselines on all four
functions. On Hartmann6, it reaches the same regret level as qLogEI with substantially fewer
evaluations. On Levy16, ORTHOBO is the only method that shows a clear improvement over
the optimization horizon. Together, these results indicate that acquisition-estimation noise can be
a significant failure mode when the surrogate is imperfect, and that orthogonalization helps by
stabilizing the acquisition values used to rank candidates. Thus, ORTHOBO does not require a
perfectly specified surrogate to improve BO performance; rather, it provides a variance-reduction
mechanism that is especially useful when MC acquisition estimates become unreliable.
G.3
Weakly fitted hyperparameters
We next study a data-scarce regime in which the surrogate family is expressive, but its hyperparameters
are weakly identified. This situation is common in expensive HPO problems: only a small initial
design is available, yet the GP must already estimate lengthscales, output scale, and noise parameters
that determine the posterior and hence the acquisition values. Uncertainty or instability in these
hyperparameters can therefore propagate to the acquisition function and distort candidate rankings.
25
75
125
175
Iteration
60
100
Best-so-far regret
Levy16
OrthoBO (ours)
qLogEI
Sobol
TuRBO
UCB
Figure 9: Best-so-far regret on Levy16 with a
Matérn-5/2 ARD kernel and only n0 = 4 ini-
tial Sobol points. ORTHOBO remains among the
strongest methods and improves steadily despite
weakly identified surrogate hyperparameters.
To isolate this effect, we use a GP with a Matérn-
5/2 kernel and ARD. Unlike the isotropic ker-
nels studied above, ARD assigns a separate
lengthscale to each input dimension. This makes
the surrogate more flexible, but also harder to fit
when the initial design is small. We therefore
initialize BO with only n0 = 4 Sobol points
and evaluate performance on Levy16, which is
particularly challenging in this setting because
the surrogate must estimate 16 lengthscales and
a noise parameter from very limited data. The
results are shown in Fig. 9.
Results. All methods initially exhibit high re-
gret, reflecting the difficulty of fitting an ARD
surrogate from only four initial observations.
Nevertheless, ORTHOBO decreases regret steadily over the optimization horizon and reaches one
of the lowest final regrets among the compared methods. These results show that orthogonalization
remains useful even when the kernel class is flexible but its hyperparameters are poorly estimated. The
gains are consistent with the proposed mechanism: reducing sensitivity of the acquisition estimate to
surrogate-posterior perturbations yields more reliable candidate rankings in early, data-limited BO.
G.4
Ensembling
In the main experiments, we used M = 1 to avoid confounding the effect of orthogonalization with
mere performance gains from a larger ensemble. We now use an ensemble of M = 3 models, each
with a different kernel: linear, RBF, and Matérn-5/2. We increased the number of iterations by 25 %
to account for additional fitting iterations for the models. We compute ℓm,t from the GP surrogate
posteriors, set τ = 1, and use δ = 0.001 as a minimum weight floor.
The results for ensembling are in Figure 10.
Further, we compute (i) the variance reduction, (ii) ranking stability metrics, and (iii) weighting
metrics. These additional measures are computed on a Sobol probe. We present the results in Table 11
and Figure 11.
50
150
250
Iteration
20
60
Best-so-far regret
Levy16
OrthoBO (ours) [Ens.]
qLogEI [Ens.]
UCB [Ens.]
Figure 10: Results for ensembling.
Table 11: Variance reduction for ensembling on Levy16.
Method
Probe variance
Top1 agr.
Flip rate
Regret
Entropy
Weight 1
Weight 2
Weight 3
UCB [Ens.]
39.25548.64
1.0000.00
0.0260.04
18.2672.40
0.1630.18
0.0080.06
0.0620.14
0.9330.14
qLogEI [Ens.]
390.5981033.83
0.8750.20
0.1670.10
2.9261.66
0.1450.16
0.0140.07
0.0730.21
0.9170.21
ORTHOBO (Ours) [Ens.]
0.0390.12
0.9580.14
0.0810.08
0.9410.54
0.1690.23
0.0080.06
0.0690.14
0.9270.14
Results. We observe: (1) ORTHOBO achieves the lowest regret. (iii) ORTHOBO has substantially
lower Sobol probing variance. (iii) Weight are highest for the Matérn-5/2 kernel ("Weight 3")
demonstrating that all methods primarily focus the "most correct" kernel. We plot the evolution of the
entropy over time in Figure 11, which shows that the weight aggregation scheme balances exploration
and exploitation.
0
100
200
Iteration
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Weight entropy
Levy16
OrthoBO (ours) [Ens.]
qLogEI [Ens.]
UCB [Ens.]
Figure 11: Evolution of the entropy across ensembling weights. For all methods, the used tempered
exponentially weighted aggregation scheme is effective in balancing exploration and exploitation at
the ensemble level.
G.5
Monte Carlo sampling ablation experiment
We here study the effect of the MC budget used to estimate the acquisition function. Here, finite-
sample acquisition noise can change candidate rankings, with the effect becoming more pronounced
for small sampling budgets S [cf. 2]. This setting is practically relevant because acquisition functions
are evaluated many times during optimization, so increasing S can be computationally expensive.
We therefore test whether the variance reduction of ORTHOBO improves BO performance when
acquisition estimates must be computed from limited MC samples.
We use an isotropic RBF kernel, thereby combining moderate surrogate mismatch with reduced
acquisition-estimation budgets. We vary S ∈{64, 128, 256, 512}. The main results for Ackley8 and
Michalewicz10 are shown in Fig. 3; additional results are provided in Fig. 12.
50
150
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Hartmann6
Best-so-far regret
MC = 64
50
150
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
MC = 128
50
150
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
MC = 256
50
150
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
MC = 512
50
150
14
18
Ackley8
Best-so-far regret
50
150
12
16
20
50
150
14
18
0
100
200
16
20
50
150
4
6
Michalewicz10
Best-so-far regret
50
150
4
6
0
100
200
5
7
50
150
4
6
0
100
200
Iteration
25
75
Levy16
Best-so-far regret
50
150
Iteration
25
75
0
100
200
Iteration
25
75
0
100
200
Iteration
25
75
Sobol
UCB
TuRBO
qLogEI
OrthoBO (ours)
Figure 12: Different mc samples
Results Reducing the MC budget makes the performance of acquisition-based methods more sensitive
to estimation noise. Across the tested budgets, ORTHOBO remains competitive on Ackley8 and
consistently achieves low regret on Michalewicz10. The effect of orthogonalization are most visible
0
10
20
Iteration
0.2
0.3
Best-so-far value
Cifar10
UCB
TuRBO
qLogEI
OrthoBO (ours)
Figure 13: Results for HPO optimization for training on CIFAR10 from scratch.
at earlier iterations, where MC estimation noise has a larger effect on the acquisition values and
hence on the induced candidate rankings. Overall, these results support the central mechanism of
ORTHOBO: orthogonalization improves the reliability of acquisition estimates when MC budgets are
limited, leading to more stable BO decisions and thus lower regret.
G.6
CIFAR10
We again utilize the outlier experiment by Ament et al. [3]. However, this time we utilize the more
challenging CIFAR10 dataset on a modified CNN architecture. To model corrupted evaluations,
we prematurely stop training with probability 20 % after observing between 100 and 1000 training
samples. We optimize the same parameters as Ament et al. [3]. To not implicitly mitigate the
corrupted evaluations, we only use n0 = 2 initial points. The results are in Figure 13. ORTHOBO
achieves the best performance, despite 20% corruptions during training.