From Token Lists to Graph Motifs:
Weisfeiler-Lehman Analysis of Sparse Autoencoder
Features
Ruben Fernandez-Boullon*
University of Vigo
ruben.fernandez.boullon@uvigo.gal
Pablo Magarinos-Docampo
University of Vigo
pablo.magarinos@uvigo.gal
Javier Perez-Robles
University of Vigo
Abstract
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have become central to mechanistic interpretability,
decomposing transformer activations into monosemantic features [1, 3, 2]. Yet ex-
isting analyses characterise features almost exclusively through top-activating token
lists or decoder weight vectors, leaving the higher-order co-occurrence structure
shared across features largely unexamined. We introduce a graph-structured repre-
sentation in which each SAE feature is modelled as a token co-occurrence graph:
nodes are the tokens most frequent near strong activations, and edges connect pairs
that co-occur within local context windows. A custom WL-style, frequency-binned
graph kernel [13, 14] then provides a similarity measure over this structural space.
Applied as a proof of concept to features from a large SAE trained on GPT-2 Small
[17] and probed with a synthetic mixed-domain corpus, our clustering recovers
heuristic motif families-punctuation-heavy patterns, language and script clusters,
and code-like templates-that are not recovered by clustering on decoder cosine
similarity (alphabetic purity 0.516 vs. 0.000). A token-histogram baseline achieves
higher overall purity (0.854 vs. 0.760), so the contribution of the graph view is
complementary rather than dominant: it surfaces structural relationships that token-
frequency and decoder-weight views alone do not capture. Cluster assignments are
stable across graph-construction hyperparameters and random seeds.
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed in high-stakes applications, motivating a
growing body of work on mechanistic interpretability that aims to understand their internal compu-
tation at the level of neurons, features, and circuits. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) over transformer
activations have been proposed as a way to disentangle polysemantic neurons into more monose-
mantic features, and have been scaled to full residual streams in GPT-2 Small and to frontier models
such as Claude 3 Sonnet [1, 2, 3, 4]. Despite this progress, most empirical analyses of SAEs describe
individual features through lists of top-activating tokens, example prompts, or human-written expla-
nations, leaving open the question of how to systematically organise and compare large dictionaries
of features.
In this paper, we explore a complementary perspective in which each SAE feature is represented as a
graph derived from its activation patterns over text. Intuitively, we treat the tokens that frequently
appear in the neighbourhood of strong activations as nodes, and connect pairs of tokens that co-occur
in local contexts when the feature is active. This yields a collection of graphs, one per feature,
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.06494v1 [cs.AI] 7 May 2026

which can be compared using a graph kernel inspired by the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) subtree kernel
[13, 14]. By clustering features in this graph-kernel space, we aim to surface recurring structural
motifs that group together features which appear unrelated if inspected only via their top tokens.
We propose graph-structured co-occurrence representations for SAE features and a custom WL-style,
frequency-binned kernel tailored to weighted token graphs (Sections 4.2-4.3). (ii) We provide a
proof-of-concept evaluation on a single SAE (6-RES-JB, layer 6) of GPT-2 Small, using a synthetic
mixed-domain corpus designed to elicit varied surface motifs (Section 5). (iii) We benchmark the
resulting clusters against decoder-cosine and token-histogram baselines using a heuristic token-type
purity metric (Section 6.2), and report robustness to graph-construction hyperparameters, k-means
seeds, feature-selection cutoffs, undirected-vs-directed edges, and a small Python-code corpus. We
do not claim mechanistic interpretation of individual features; the conclusions are about whether the
graph view yields a structural organisation distinct from existing baselines.
Background
Sparse autoencoders over transformer activations have been proposed as a way to discover more
interpretable feature bases than raw neurons, by learning an overcomplete dictionary with sparse
codes that reconstruct the original activations [1, 3]. Recent work has demonstrated that such SAEs
can capture meaningful concepts, from simple syntax and punctuation patterns to more abstract
semantic and factual knowledge, and can be scaled across all residual stream layers of GPT-2 Small
[3, 2].
Graph kernels provide a way to compare graphs by implicitly mapping them into a feature space
where inner products correspond to measures of structural similarity. The Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL)
framework iteratively refines node labels by hashing together local neighbourhood information;
the resulting WL subtree kernel of Shervashidze et al. [14] extends the original combinatorial
test of Weisfeiler and Lehman [13] into a family of efficient graph kernels widely used for graph
classification. Standard Python libraries such as GraKeL [15] and graphkit-learn [16] provide off-
the-shelf implementations. In our experiments we use a custom implementation that departs from
the standard subtree kernel in two ways: it derives initial node labels from log-scaled, binned co-
occurrence frequencies rather than raw token identities, and it normalises by the geometric mean
of diagonal kernel values (Section 4.3). For brevity we still abbreviate this kernel as "WL-style" or
simply "WL" throughout, with the explicit caveat that it is an inspired variant rather than the kernel
of [14] verbatim.
Related Work
The superposition hypothesis [1] motivates SAEs as a tool for decomposing polysemantic neurons
into monosemantic features by learning overcomplete dictionaries with sparse latent codes. Bricken
et al. [2] established the foundational methodology on a one-layer transformer, recovering hundreds
of interpretable features via dictionary learning on MLP activations. At frontier scale, Templeton et
al. [4] showed that SAEs trained on Claude 3 Sonnet yield millions of interpretable features spanning
fine-grained syntax, factual knowledge, and abstract concepts. Early SAEs impose L1 regularisation,
but the resulting shrinkage bias systematically underestimates feature magnitudes [3]. Gated SAEs [5]
address this by decoupling feature selection from magnitude estimation via a dedicated sigmoid
gate and an independent ReLU branch. TopK SAEs [3] replace continuous regularisation with a
hard cardinality constraint retaining exactly K activations per forward pass. JumpReLU SAEs [6]
introduce a learnable per-feature threshold with a discontinuous activation function, enabling direct
L0 optimisation via straight-through estimators and achieving state-of-the-art reconstruction fidelity
on frontier models. The SAE we analyse (6-RES-JB) uses a standard ReLU activation; whether
graph-structured motifs persist across these newer architectural variants is an open direction.
Li et al. [7] demonstrated through large-scale geometric analysis that SAE feature spaces exhibit
rich multi-scale structure rather than being isotropic. At the finest scale, feature vectors form near-
crystalline arrangements in latent subspaces that encode relational analogies akin to Word2Vec
arithmetic. At an intermediate scale, co-occurrence topology reveals tightly localised "lobes" of
features sharing semantic domains-such as Python programming, biomedical vocabulary, or French
text-that are physically adjacent in decoder geometry. At the broadest scale, the spectral distribution
of the full feature point cloud follows a power law, with maximum variance concentrated in middle
transformer layers. This multi-scale geometric organisation directly motivates the graph-based view
of this paper: rather than describing features in isolation through top-activating tokens, we build
co-occurrence graphs that capture neighbourhood structure across activations and apply graph kernels
to surface higher-order motifs spanning multiple features simultaneously.
Mechanistic interpretability has moved toward explicitly graph-structured representations of infor-
mation flow. Marks et al. [8] introduced sparse feature circuits-directed acyclic graphs connecting
SAE features across layers via causal attribution-and showed that these circuits provide concise,
editable explanations of model behaviour on narrow tasks. Building on this, Dunefsky et al. [9]
proposed Cross-Layer Transcoders (CLTs), which replace opaque MLP blocks with linear surrogates
projecting residual states to post-MLP outputs as a direct linear combination of learned features, en-
abling scalable construction of full attribution graphs in which edges are weighted by Jacobian-based
causal influence. To our knowledge, no prior work applies graph kernels to compare SAE feature
co-occurrence graphs; our approach is complementary to circuit tracing, operating at the level of
local activation structure rather than inter-layer causal attribution.
Method
4.1
Models and sparse autoencoders
We focus on GPT-2 Small as our base language model, using the implementation and pretrained
weights from HuggingFace Transformers [17]. For sparse autoencoders, we rely on the public open-
sae-soup collection [3, 2] trained on the residual stream of GPT-2 Small. Concretely, all experiments
in this paper use a single SAE attached to the residual stream at layer 6 before the attention block
(6-RES-JB), which exposes 24,576 sparse features with an expansion factor of 32 (dmodel = 768,
dsae = 24,576). The SAE was originally trained on an OpenWebText-like corpus [18]; in this paper
we re-use the released weights without retraining and probe activations on a different (synthetic
mixed-domain) corpus described in Section 5. We do not run cross-layer comparisons: extending the
analysis to other residual layers and SAE architectures is left to future work and discussed as a scope
limitation in Section 8.
4.2
Constructing graphs from SAE features
Given a fixed SAE and a corpus of text, we collect activations for a subset of features over many
model runs. For each feature f, we define a high-activation event at position t whenever its activation
zt,f exceeds a feature-specific threshold τf, chosen as the p-th percentile of its empirical activation
distribution. Around each such event, we consider a local window of tokens and accumulate statistics
about which tokens tend to appear in the neighbourhood of strong activations.
To convert feature f into a graph Gf, we proceed as follows. First, we select the top K tokens that
appear most frequently in windows centred around high-activation events for f; these tokens form the
node set of Gf. Each node carries a discrete label derived from the log-scaled co-occurrence frequency
of its token within the feature (Section 4.3), so node identity reflects activation strength rather than
token identity. Second, we add an undirected edge between two nodes if their corresponding tokens
co-occur at least C times within such windows for feature f, with edge weight equal to the co-
occurrence count. This yields a weighted graph that captures the local co-activation structure induced
by the feature across many contexts. In addition to the primary graph specification, we later test
the robustness of our conclusions to reasonable variations in the window size, top-K token cutoff,
and co-occurrence threshold used to instantiate these graphs. We note that GPT-2’s autoregressive
architecture implies a natural temporal ordering of tokens; we therefore also evaluate a directed
variant of these graphs (Appendix E) in which edges respect a frequency-based proxy for causal
ordering.
4.3
Comparing features with a WL-style graph kernel
Once each feature is represented as a labelled weighted graph Gf, we compare pairs of features using
a custom WL-style graph kernel. We perform h = 3 refinement iterations starting from initial node
labels derived from log-scaled co-occurrence frequencies (log(1 + c), where c is the row-sum of co-
occurrences for each node), discretised into 64 bins. At each iteration, every node label is updated as
a weighted average of its neighbours’ labels (weighted by edge co-occurrence counts), and re-binned.
The resulting per-graph histogram of node-label counts is treated as an explicit feature map, and
the kernel value K(Gf, Gf ′) is the inner product of these histograms. This implementation departs
from the canonical WL subtree kernel of Shervashidze et al. [14] in three respects: (i) the initial
labels encode co-occurrence strength rather than raw token identity; (ii) label refinement aggregates
neighbour information through weighted averaging and binning, rather than label hashing; and (iii)
the final kernel sums over a single histogram rather than concatenating per-iteration histograms. We
therefore refer to it as a "WL-style frequency-binned graph kernel" rather than as the standard WL
subtree kernel.
The resulting kernel matrix K ∈RN×N for N features captures shared local neighbourhood structure.
We normalise K to [0, 1] by dividing each entry Kij by the geometric mean of the diagonal entries
p
KiiKjj, then symmetrise as K ←(K +K⊤)/2. We embed features into a low-dimensional space
by applying kernel PCA with the precomputed kernel to 2 dimensions (random_state=42), and
perform clustering via k-means (n_init=20, random_state=42) in this embedding space to obtain
groups of features that share similar structural motifs.
Throughout, we compare this WL-style representation to two baselines: (i) clustering in the space of
SAE decoder vectors using cosine similarity, and (ii) clustering based on token histograms constructed
from each feature’s top-K tokens.
4.4
Token-type labels and cluster purity
To evaluate whether clusters correspond to interpretable token-type families, we use a heuristic
labelling scheme and a standard cluster-purity metric, both of which we summarise here and de-
fine formally in Appendix B. Each token t is decoded to a string and assigned a coarse label
ℓ(t) ∈{symbolic, alphabetic, numeric, mixed} based on the dominant character class of its decoded
form (Python string.punctuation/digits for symbolic, ASCII letters for alphabetic, digits for
numeric, and mixed for tokens that fall in none of these majority classes). Each feature f then receives
the plurality label ˆℓ(f) over its top-K tokens. Given a clustering {Ic}K
c=1, the dominant label ˆyc of
cluster c is the plurality of ˆℓover its members, the per-cluster purity is the fraction of members whose
label matches ˆyc, and the overall purity P is the size-weighted average:
P = 1
N
K
X
c=1
{i ∈Ic : ˆℓ(i) = ˆyc}
.
(1)
Category-specific purities (e.g. alphabetic, symbolic) average per-cluster purity over clusters whose
dominant label equals the target category.
Experimental Setup
5.1
Data
Our main experiments use a synthetic mixed-domain corpus whose released snapshot contains
n_tokens_collected = 78,749 token positions (approximately 79k), generated procedurally
from a fixed set of templates spanning 13 surface registers: Python and JavaScript code, Bash
commands, mathematical expressions, URLs and file paths, JSON structures, social-media-style
posts, natural-language paragraphs, formal e-mail headers, and short passages in Spanish, French,
German, and Japanese. The mixture is constructed (with random seed 42) to elicit a wide range of
surface motifs-punctuation density, alphabetic structure, code syntax, multi-script tokens-so that
any motif families surfaced by the WL-style kernel are not artefacts of a single text register. The full
templates, domain weights, and exact token budget are listed in the released code (main.py). Tokens
are encoded with the GPT-2 byte-pair tokeniser; the corpus is fed through GPT-2 Small [17] with the
6-RES-JB SAE hooked at layer 6 to record activations for all selected features.
This synthetic-corpus design is a deliberate scope choice: the SAE itself was trained on a real
OpenWebText-like corpus, but our analysis only inspects how its features partition across texts we
feed in. Using a templated corpus exchanges naturalistic frequency statistics for explicit control over
which surface registers are present, at the cost of distributional realism. Generalisation to natural
distributions such as OpenWebText [18] or to a code corpus such as The Stack [19] therefore remains
an empirical question; we report a small Python-code spot check in Appendix F and discuss this
limitation explicitly in Section 8.
5.2
Feature selection and graph construction
From the full set of 24,576 features in the SAE, we select a subset of N = 2048 features for analysis,
retaining features whose nonzero activation fraction lies between 0.1% and 98%. For each selected
feature we build a co-occurrence graph as described in Section 4.2, yielding a collection of N = 2048
labelled graphs. Each feature is also assigned a heuristic token-type label as defined in Section 4.4,
which is used to compute cluster purity scores. The sensitivity of clustering results to the choice of
αmin and αmax is examined in Section 6.5.
5.3
Kernel configuration and baselines
For the WL-style kernel, we use a custom implementation (not GraKeL [15] or graphkit-learn [16])
with the configuration introduced in Section 4.3: h = 3 refinement iterations, log-scaled initial node
labels, 64 label bins per iteration, and geometric-mean normalisation to [0, 1]. We compute the full
N × N kernel matrix and symmetrise it before applying kernel PCA and clustering.
For baselines, we construct two alternative similarity matrices: (i) cosine similarity between SAE
decoder vectors (normalised to unit L2 norm), and (ii) cosine similarity between normalised token
histograms for each feature, constructed from the top-K token counts per feature.
5.4
Complete parameter specification
All experimental parameters are listed below for reproducibility. SAE: 6-RES-JB from open-sae-
soup [3], layer 6 residual stream (resid_pre), dmodel = 768, dsae = 24,576, expansion factor 32,
ReLU activation. Corpus: synthetic mixed-domain corpus described in Section 5, generated with
seed 42. Token budget: M = 78,749 token positions. Feature selection: percentile threshold
p = 50, min nonzero = 0.1%, max nonzero = 98%, yielding N = 2048 features. Graph: window
size W = 10, top-K tokens = 30, co-occurrence threshold C = 3, minimum 5 high-activation events,
max 200 events per feature. Kernel: h = 3 WL-style iterations, 64 bins, log-scaled labels, geometric-
mean normalisation. Clustering: k-means (K = 10 clusters, n_init=20, random_state=42).
Kernel PCA: 2 components, random_state=42. Motif example selection: feature closest to
cluster centroid in the kernel PCA embedding. Seed: all random states = 42 unless reported
otherwise.
To test whether the clustering structure depends strongly on a single graph-construction choice, we
evaluate a small grid of reasonable hyperparameters on the primary SAE layer and main corpus.
We compare window sizes W ∈{5, 10, 15}, top-token cutoffs K ∈{30, 50}, and co-occurrence
thresholds C ∈{3, 5}, while keeping the remaining parts of the pipeline fixed. We compare the
resulting cluster assignments using stability metrics: Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) and Normalised
Mutual Information (NMI), measured relative to the default configuration and across pairs of settings.
Results
6.1
RQ1: Do graph-based clusters correspond to structural motif families?
To obtain a global view of the feature space, we embed the WL-style kernel matrix into two dimensions
using kernel PCA and apply k-means clustering with K = 10 clusters. Figure 1a shows the
resulting 2D embedding, coloured by cluster assignment. Under the heuristic token-type labels
of Section 4.4, features form visually coherent regions that we interpret as broadly distinct motif
families: punctuation-heavy patterns, code-like structures with operator and bracket tokens, and a
smaller set of multi-script and natural-language token clusters.
To make these motifs more concrete, we inspect several clusters in detail. For each cluster, we select
a few prototype features closest to the cluster centroid in the embedding space, and visualise their
graphs along with their top-activating tokens. Figure 1b shows representative graphs, illustrating
tightly connected punctuation subgraphs, mixed alphanumeric patterns reminiscent of identifiers, and
loosely connected token communities tied to specific languages or domains. These visualisations are
illustrative rather than exhaustive: a quantitative comparison against baselines is given in Section 6.2,
and a small-scale verification on a Python code corpus in Appendix F.
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Kernel PCA dimension 1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Kernel PCA dimension 2
Kernel PCA Embedding of SAE Features (WL Graph Kernel)
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Cluster 5
Cluster 6
Cluster 7
Cluster 8
Cluster 9
(a) Kernel PCA embedding coloured by k-means
cluster assignment (K = 10).
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Cluster 0, Feature 50
(30 nodes, 234 edges)
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Cluster 0, Feature 66
(30 nodes, 242 edges)
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Cluster 0, Feature 76
(30 nodes, 225 edges)
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Cluster 1, Feature 12
(30 nodes, 290 edges)
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Cluster 1, Feature 22
(30 nodes, 238 edges)
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Cluster 1, Feature 25
(30 nodes, 259 edges)
Structural Motifs from WL-based Clustering
(b) Representative co-occurrence graphs from selected
clusters.
Figure 1: (a) Kernel PCA embedding of the N = 2048 selected SAE features from layer 6 (6-RES-
JB), based on the custom WL-style frequency-binned graph kernel (h = 3, W = 10, K = 30,
C = 3), coloured by k-means cluster assignment (ninit = 20). The 2048 features are selected from
the 24,576 SAE features at activation-percentile threshold p = 50 (Section 5). (b) Representative co-
occurrence graphs drawn from the WL-style clusters, illustrating qualitatively distinct surface motifs
(punctuation-heavy patterns, code-like structures, language- and script-specific token communities).
A larger gallery is provided in the released code.
6.2
RQ2: Does the graph view capture structure beyond token and decoder baselines?
We next compare the WL-style clustering to two simpler baselines: clustering in the space of
SAE decoder vectors, and clustering based on token histograms. To quantify the extent to which
clusters align with simple heuristics, we automatically assign each feature a coarse label based on the
composition of its top-activating tokens, distinguishing predominantly symbolic, alphabetic, numeric,
and mixed patterns. We then compute cluster purity (Section 4.4, Eq. 1) with respect to these heuristic
labels under each similarity measure.
Table 1 reports the average cluster purity for WL-style, decoder-based, and token-histogram-based
similarity.
In this evaluation, WL captures structural regularities not reflected in decoder vectors alone: it
achieves an alphabetic purity of 0.516 versus 0.000 for decoder cosine, indicating that under a
K = 10 k-means partition the decoder-cosine clustering does not isolate any cluster whose plurality
token-type label is alphabetic, whereas the WL-style clustering does. WL also achieves a slightly
higher overall purity than decoder cosine (0.760 vs. 0.754) and a higher symbolic purity (0.781
vs. 0.754). The token histogram baseline, however, achieves the highest overall purity (0.854) by
directly leveraging token-frequency information. We therefore read these numbers as showing that
the token-histogram baseline is a strong competitor for overall feature organisation, and that WL’s
marginal advantage lies in capturing alphabetic structural patterns that survive after factoring out
marginal token frequencies, rather than in dominating broad clustering quality. Differences this small
(e.g., 0.760 vs. 0.754) should be read with caution: we report multi-seed variability below but do not
compute bootstrap confidence intervals over the underlying feature sample.
Method
Symbolic
Alphabetic
Overall
WL-style kernel
0.781
0.516
0.760
Decoder cosine
0.754
0.000
0.754
Token histogram
0.894
0.749
0.854
Table 1: Cluster purity (Eq. 1) with respect to heuristic token-type labels under our WL-style
frequency-binned graph kernel, decoder-cosine similarity, and top-K token-histogram cosine similar-
ity. Higher is more aligned with the heuristic labels; differences below ∼0.01 are within multi-seed
noise (Table 2).
Per-cluster sizes (range 91-484) and per-cluster purity values are listed in Appendix C (Table 3). The
dominant type is symbolic (punctuation-heavy motifs) for nine of ten clusters; cluster 8 is the sole
alphabetic-dominant cluster, with purity 51.6%.
6.3
Robustness to graph construction hyperparameters
We next examine how sensitive the clustering is to the graph-construction hyperparameters introduced
in Section 4.2. Across all 3 × 2 × 2 = 12 grid points with W ∈{5, 10, 15}, K ∈{30, 50}, and
C ∈{3, 5}, overall purity ranges from 0.655 to 0.812 (mean 0.748 ± 0.051, default W = 10,
K = 30, C = 3). Qualitatively, the main motif families are preserved: symbol clusters stay tightly
grouped, language and script communities still form distinct regions, and code-like motifs continue to
appear as separate families. We read this as evidence that the graph-structured view is not an artefact
of a single window size or sparsification threshold, although the exact cluster boundaries do shift
modestly under more aggressive or more permissive settings.
6.4
Ablation study and multi-seed stability
We assess sensitivity to k-means initialisation by re-running clustering with 10 random seeds
({42, 0, 7, 13, 21, 33, 47, 64, 99, 123}) on the WL-style embedding. Mean overall purity across seeds
is 0.7573 ± 0.0019, with σ < 0.01 for every metric in Table 2, indicating stability with respect to
initialisation. We further ablate across seven similarity measures: the default WL-style kernel, the
same kernel with edge weights zeroed, the same kernel with node labels randomly shuffled, decoder
cosine, token histogram, co-occurrence-matrix cosine, and Jaccard similarity on top-token sets.
Method
Overall
Alphabetic
ARI vs. default
WL-style (default)
0.757
0.500
-
WL-style, edges removed
0.754
0.000
0.088
WL-style, labels shuffled
0.768
0.584
0.618
Decoder cosine
0.754
0.000
0.002
Token histogram
0.853
0.755
0.208
Co-occurrence cosine
0.769
0.729
0.030
Jaccard top-token
0.839
0.658
0.190
Table 2: Ablation with multi-seed k-means (10 seeds; σ ≤0.01 for every column, omitted for
space). Zeroing the edges of the WL-style kernel drops alphabetic purity to 0 while leaving overall
purity essentially unchanged: edges (not just node-label histograms) are what give the WL view its
alphabetic-dominant cluster. Shuffling node labels keeps purity above the default and yields ARI
0.618 with the default, indicating that the kernel relies mostly on edge structure and marginal label
frequencies, not specific label identities. Token-histogram and co-occurrence-matrix baselines also
achieve high alphabetic purity, so much of the broader signal is recoverable from token-frequency or
co-occurrence marginals.
The headline observation is the gap on alphabetic purity between the WL-style kernel (0.500) and
decoder cosine (0.000); we report it as an empirical observation under the heuristic metric, not as a
statistically tested claim. The reported point estimates are stable to k-means initialisation but remain
artefacts of a single feature sample, a single SAE layer, and a single probing corpus.
6.5
Sensitivity to feature selection cutoffs
We additionally probe whether the clustering depends on the specific activation-fraction cutoffs
αmin, αmax used to select the N = 2048 features (Section 4.2). Sweeping five configurations span-
ning [αmin, αmax] ∈{[0.001, 0.98], [0.005, 0.95], [0.010, 0.90], [0.001, 0.99], [0.0005, 0.98]} keeps
mean purity in the range 0.7547-0.7573 with σ ≤0.002 across 10 k-means seeds, all within multi-
seed noise of the baseline (full table in Appendix D). The 0.1%-98% thresholds therefore do not
appear to introduce a material selection bias.
6.6
Directed graphs and cross-corpus spot checks
Two further checks, deferred to the appendix for space, probe robustness along orthogonal axes.
(i) Directed graphs (Appendix E): replacing each undirected co-occurrence graph with a lower-
triangular approximation that mimics autoregressive ordering preserves overall purity (0.754 vs.
undirected 0.757) but eliminates the alphabetic-dominant cluster (ARI 0.123 vs. undirected). The
triangular approximation discards roughly half of the co-occurrence signal, and the sparser alphabetic
structure appears to fall below the threshold needed for cluster formation; a fully causal treatment
requires positional data not retained by the cached graphs used here. (ii) Python-code spot check
(Appendix F): re-running the kernel and clustering on a generated Python corpus of order 104-105
tokens yields 99.1% feature overlap with the main run and ARI/NMI of 0.944/0.928 against the
main-corpus clustering, so the cluster structure is largely stable when activations are recomputed on a
focused code corpus. Within the main clustering, clusters 6 and 7 carry the highest density of Python
keywords, operators, and brackets (33.1% and 32.5% of top tokens), consistent with code-like motifs
being concentrated in specific clusters. We treat both checks as suggestive rather than definitive; an
evaluation on a naturalistic code corpus such as The Stack [19] remains future work.
Discussion
WL-style kernels aggregate local neighbourhood information: what matters is not only which tokens
appear near a feature’s activations, but how those tokens are connected within the same windows. In
our setting, alphabetic patterns appear to produce topological signatures-densely connected token
communities in predictable sequential arrangements-that the graph view reflects but decoder cosine
does not. Decoder cosine captures what a feature "points toward" in residual-stream geometry, but
is blind to the co-occurrence structure of activation contexts; this is consistent with its collapse to
0.000 alphabetic purity in our K = 10 partition. We read this as a possible (not causally established)
distinction between decoder geometry and activation-context topology, related to but weaker than the
multi-scale geometric organisation reported by Li et al. [7].
The higher overall purity of the token histogram (0.854 vs. 0.760 for WL) is consistent with a simple
property of layer-6 features: marginal token distributions already capture most of the information
needed for the broad heuristic categorisation we use. The graph view appears to add information
specifically where the relationships among co-occurring tokens matter, most visibly for alphabetic
features (WL: 0.516 vs. histogram: 0.749, decoder: 0.000; Table 1). The dominance of symbolic
clusters (9 of 10) with a single alphabetic cluster is consistent with layer 6 carrying substantial
positional and syntactic information, and suggests that graph-based analysis is most informative as a
complement to token-frequency methods rather than as a replacement.
Broader impact.
This work is foundational interpretability research that analyses existing, publicly
available language models and sparse autoencoders. Positive societal impacts include improved
transparency and auditability of neural language models: by systematically organising the inter-
nal representations of transformer models, this line of research contributes tools that could help
practitioners identify potentially harmful or biased feature clusters, facilitate safety auditing of AI
systems, and improve human understanding of model behaviour in high-stakes applications. We
identify no direct negative societal impact: the paper does not introduce new generative capabilities,
deployment-ready systems, or high-risk model releases. As with any interpretability methodology, a
possible indirect risk is that a deeper understanding of model internals could in principle be exploited
to reverse-engineer or circumvent safety measures in future systems; we consider this risk low for the
present contribution, given its analytical and non-generative character.
8
Limitations
Scalability.
The WL-style kernel computation requires forming the full N × N pairwise kernel
matrix, which entails O(N 2 · h) work in the number of selected features N and refinement iterations
h. For the current setting of N = 2048 and h = 3 this is tractable on a single CPU. However, scaling
to the full 24,576-feature dictionary or to larger modern SAEs with up to N = 131,072 features [3]
would render the dense kernel matrix infeasible in both time and memory. Practical extensions would
require approximate kernel methods (e.g., Nyström approximations, random feature maps for graph
kernels) or hierarchical clustering strategies that avoid materialising the full matrix.
Custom kernel rather than standard WL.
The kernel used here departs from the standard WL
subtree kernel of Shervashidze et al. [14] in three ways (Section 4.3): initial node labels encode
log-binned co-occurrence counts rather than token identities, refinement uses weighted neighbour
averaging rather than label hashing, and the final feature map sums over a single iteration’s histogram
rather than concatenating across iterations. We have not benchmarked the standard WL subtree kernel
(e.g., as implemented in GraKeL [15]) against ours; it is therefore an open question whether the
alphabetic-cluster gap over decoder cosine survives under a standard WL implementation, or is in
part an artefact of our choice of label and refinement schemes. The label-shuffle ablation (Table 2)
suggests that purity is largely insensitive to the specific log-binned identities, mitigating but not
eliminating this concern.
Causal graph structure.
Our default graph construction treats co-occurrence edges as undi-
rected, ignoring GPT-2’s autoregressive causal structure. We partially address this in Appendix E
with a directed graph variant. Our released code (src/graph_construction.py) also exposes a
directed=True mode that records true positional ordering at graph-construction time; we left the
experimental evaluation of that mode to future work, since it requires recomputing the full set of
feature graphs.
Scope of evaluation.
This study focuses on a single base model (GPT-2 Small) and a single
SAE architecture (6-RES-JB) at a single residual layer; stronger claims about layerwise or model-
family generalisation require broader sweeps. The probing corpus is a synthetic mixed-domain
mixture (Section 5) chosen to expose surface-form variation, not a sample from any particular natural
distribution; the SAE itself was trained on an OpenWebText-like corpus and we do not retrain or
reanalyse it on naturalistic text in this paper. Our evaluation relies on heuristic token-type labels
that capture broad surface structure but do not constitute causal or mechanistic proofs about what
each feature actually represents; probe-based or human validation would be needed to confirm that
motif families correspond to meaningful interpretability categories. The cross-corpus spot check
(Appendix F) uses generated Python templates rather than a naturalistic code corpus; evaluation on
The Stack [19] at scale remains an important direction. Finally, small differences in purity between
methods (e.g., 0.760 vs. 0.754) should be interpreted cautiously without bootstrap confidence intervals
over the underlying feature sample.
Conclusion
We introduced a graph-structured perspective on sparse autoencoder features in transformer language
models, in which each feature is represented as a weighted graph capturing co-occurrence relationships
among tokens in the neighbourhood of its activations. By comparing these graphs with a custom
WL-style frequency-binned kernel and clustering the resulting similarity matrix, we surfaced families
of features corresponding to heuristic motif categories that are not separated by clustering on decoder
vectors alone. Our headline empirical observation is that the graph view recovers an alphabetic-
dominant cluster (purity 0.516) that decoder cosine does not (0.000), while a token-histogram baseline
outperforms the graph view on overall purity (0.854 vs. 0.760). We therefore present graph-based
representations as a complementary lens rather than a replacement for token-frequency analyses, and
limit our claims to surface-level structural motifs. Future work should validate motif families through
human evaluation, scale the analysis to multiple SAEs, layers, and natural corpora, and compute
statistical uncertainty (e.g., bootstrap confidence intervals) for purity and similarity metrics. Code is
publicly available; the repository URL is anonymised for double-blind review and will be provided in
the camera-ready version. Full reproduction steps are given in Appendix A.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
References
[1] Elhage, N., Hume, T., Olsson, C., Schiefer, N., Henighan, T., Kravec, S., Hatfield-Dodds,
Z., Lasenby, R., Drain, D., Chen, C., Grosse, R., McCandlish, S., Kaplan, J., Amodei, D.,
Wattenberg, M., and Olah, C. Toy models of superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.

[2] Bricken, T., Templeton, A., Batson, J., Chen, B., Jermyn, A., Conerly, T., Turner, N., Anil, C.,
Denison, C., Askell, A., Lasenby, R., Wu, Y., Kravec, S., Schiefer, N., Maxwell, T., Joseph, N.,
Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Tamkin, A., Nguyen, K., McLean, B., Burke, J. E., Hume, T., Carter, S.,
Henighan, T., and Olah, C. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with
dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. 
pub/2023/monosemantic-features/
[3] Gao, L., Dupré la Tour, T., Tillman, H., Goh, G., Troll, R., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., Leike, J.,
and Wu, J. Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders. arXiv:2406.04093, 2024.
[4] Templeton, A., Conerly, T., Marcus, J., Lindsey, J., Bricken, T., Chen, B., Pearce, A., Citro,
C., Ameisen, E., Jones, A., Cunningham, H., Turner, N. L., McDougall, C., MacDiarmid,
M., Freeman, C. D., Sumers, T. R., Rees, E., Batson, J., Jermyn, A., Carter, S., Olah, C.,
and Henighan, T. Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from Claude 3
Sonnet. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2024. 
scaling-monosemanticity/
[5] Rajamanoharan, S., Conmy, A., Smith, L., Lieberum, T., Varma, V., Kramár, J., Shah, R., and
Nanda, N. Improving dictionary learning with gated sparse autoencoders. arXiv:2404.16014,
2024.
[6] Rajamanoharan, S., Lieberum, T., Sonnerat, N., Conmy, A., Varma, V., Kramár, J., and Nanda,
N. Jumping ahead: Improving reconstruction fidelity with JumpReLU sparse autoencoders.
arXiv:2407.14435, 2024.
[7] Li, Y., Michaud, E. J., Baek, D. D., Engels, J., Sun, X., and Tegmark, M. The geometry of
concepts: Sparse autoencoder feature structure. arXiv:2410.19750, 2024.
[8] Marks, S., Rager, C., Michaud, E. J., Belinkov, Y., Bau, D., and Mueller, A. Sparse
feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models.
arXiv:2403.19647, 2024.
[9] Dunefsky, J., Chlenski, P., and Nanda, N. Transcoders find interpretable LLM feature circuits.
arXiv:2406.11944, 2024.
[10] Karvonen, A., Rager, C., Marks, S., Lin, J., Tigges, C., Bloom, J., Bau, D., Belinkov, Y.,
Lindsey, J., Mueller, A., and Smith, L. SAEBench: A comprehensive benchmark for sparse
autoencoders in language model interpretability. arXiv:2503.09532, 2025.
[11] Shu, D., Wu, X., Zhao, H., Rai, D., Yao, Z., Liu, N., and Du, M. A survey on sparse autoencoders:
Interpreting the internal mechanisms of large language models. arXiv:2503.05613, 2025.
[12] Paulo, G., Mallen, A., Juang, C., and Belrose, N. Automatically interpreting millions of features
in large language models. arXiv:2410.13928, 2024.
[13] Weisfeiler, B. and Leman, A. A reduction of a graph to a canonical form and an algebra arising
during this process. Nauchno-Tekhnicheskaya Informatsia, Ser. 2, 9:12-16, 1968. (English
translation by G. Ryabov, 2018.)
[14] Shervashidze, N., Schweitzer, P., van Leeuwen, E. J., Mehlhorn, K., and Borgwardt, K. M.
Weisfeiler-Lehman graph kernels. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(77):2539-2561,
2011.
[15] Siglidis, G., Nikolentzos, G., Limnios, S., Giatsidis, C., Skianis, K., and Vazirgiannis, M.
GraKeL: A graph kernel library in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(54):1-5,
2020.
[16] Jia, L., Gaüzère, B., and Honeine, P. graphkit-learn: A Python library for graph kernels based
on linear patterns. Pattern Recognition Letters, 143:113-121, 2021.
[17] Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., and Sutskever, I. Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Technical Report, 2019.
[18] Gokaslan, A. and Cohen, V. OpenWebText corpus. 
OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019.
[19] Kocetkov, D., Li, R., Ben Allal, L., Li, J., Mou, C., Muñoz Ferrandis, C., Jernite, Y., Mitchell,
M., Hughes, S., Wolf, T., Bahdanau, D., von Werra, L., and de Vries, H. The Stack: 3 TB of
permissively licensed source code. arXiv:2211.15533, 2022.
A
Reproducibility
All code required to reproduce the experiments will be made publicly available. The entire exper-
imental pipeline can be executed sequentially, covering the following general stages:Model and
SAE Initialization: Load the standard GPT-2 Small model alongside the targeted layer-6 Sparse
Autoencoder (specifically, the 6-RES-JB SAE from standard open-source repositories).Corpus Gener-
ation and Activation Collection: Construct the synthetic mixed-domain corpus using a fixed random
seed (42). Process this corpus through the model to collect activations for all 24,576 SAE features
across the target token positions (approximately 78,749 tokens, using a standard batch size such as
512).Feature Selection: Filter the features based on their activation frequency, retaining those within
a specific nonzero activation fraction (e.g., [0.1%, 98%]), and select the top N = 2048 features based
on activity using a 50th-percentile threshold.Graph Construction: For each selected feature, build
a weighted co-occurrence graph using a window size of W = 10, considering the top K = 30
tokens, and applying a co-occurrence threshold of C = 3.Kernel Computation: Compute the N × N
kernel matrix using a Weisfeiler-Lehman-style approach with h = 3 iterations, log-scaled labels,
64 bins per iteration, and geometric-mean normalization.Clustering: Reduce dimensionality using
Kernel PCA (2 components) and apply k-means clustering (K = 10 clusters, 20 initializations) using
fixed random seeds to ensure consistency.Evaluation and Ablations: Compute standard evaluation
metrics, including heuristic token-type labels, cluster purity, and ARI/NMI. The pipeline also includes
steps to systematically reproduce the robustness grid, ablation studies (such as multi-seed checks,
similarity measures, and cutoff variations), and cross-corpus analyses discussed in the main text and
appendices.DependenciesThe experimental framework requires Python 3.10 or higher and relies on
standard machine learning, scientific computing, and graph processing libraries (including PyTorch,
Transformers, Accelerate, NumPy, SciPy, scikit-learn, NetworkX, GraKeL, and pandas). All random
seeds are set to 42 by default to ensure exact reproducibility across runs.
B
Heuristic token-type labels and cluster purity
This appendix gives the formal definitions summarised in Section 4.4.
Character-type partition.
We partition the Unicode code points into three (overlapping) sets,
derived from Python’s string module:
S = string.punctuation ∪string.digits ∪{’ ’, ’\n’, ’\t’},
A = string.ascii_letters,
N = string.digits.
Note that N ⊂S; digits are counted in both symbolic and numeric tallies.
Token label ℓ(t).
Given a token t decoded to a string st, define character-type counts
cS(t) =
X
x∈st
1[x ∈S],
cA(t) =
X
x∈st
1[x ∈A],
cN (t) =
X
x∈st
1[x ∈N],
and let total(t) = cS(t) + cA(t) + cN (t). The character-fraction scores are πS(t) = cS(t)/total(t),
and analogously for πA and πN . The token label is assigned by the priority rule
ℓ(t) =







symbolic
if πS(t) > 0.5,
alphabetic
else if πA(t) > 0.5,
numeric
else if πN (t) > 0.3,
mixed
otherwise.
Feature label ˆℓ(f) and cluster purity.
For a feature f with top-K tokens Tf = {t1, . . . , tK},
the feature label is the plurality vote ˆℓ(f) = arg maxy
{t ∈Tf : ℓ(t) = y}
, with y ∈
{symbolic, alphabetic, numeric, mixed}. Given a clustering {Ic}K
c=1 of the N features, the dom-
inant label of cluster c is ˆyc = arg maxy
{i ∈Ic : ˆℓ(i) = y}
, and per-cluster purity is
purity(c) = |{i ∈Ic : ˆℓ(i) = ˆyc}|/|Ic|. The overall purity reported in Eq. 1 is the size-weighted
mean. Category-specific purity for label y averages purity(c) over Cy = {c : ˆyc = y}:
Py =
|Cy|
X
c∈Cy
purity(c).
C
Per-cluster summary
Table 3 lists the ten WL-style clusters with their sizes, dominant heuristic token type, and per-
cluster purity (corresponding to the partition described in Section 6.2). Cluster sizes range from
91 to 484 features. The dominant type is symbolic for nine of ten clusters; cluster 8 is the only
alphabetic-dominant cluster, with purity 51.6%.
Cluster
Size
Dominant
Purity
207
symbolic
63.8%
484
symbolic
87.4%
154
symbolic
82.5%
91
symbolic
79.1%
143
symbolic
56.6%
134
symbolic
71.6%
289
symbolic
92.7%
226
symbolic
86.7%
161
alphabetic
51.6%
159
symbolic
49.1%
Table 3: Summary of the ten WL-style clusters. Bold row is the only alphabetic-dominant cluster; all
others are symbolic (punctuation-heavy).
D
Sensitivity to feature-selection cutoffs
Table 4 reports the full sweep over activation-fraction cutoffs summarised in Section 6.5. For each
configuration we identify which of the 24,576 SAE features would be selected, intersect that set with
our current 2048 features (for which the WL-style embedding is precomputed), and re-run k-means
(K = 10, 10 seeds) on the resulting subset of the embedding.
Config
Cutoff range [αmin, αmax]
N (intersect)
Mean purity
Std
A (baseline)
[0.001, 0.98]
0.7573
0.0019
B (tighter)
[0.005, 0.95]
0.7563
0.0020
C (tightest)
[0.010, 0.90]
0.7547
0.0015
D (wider upper)
[0.001, 0.99]
0.7573
0.0019
E (wider lower)
[0.0005, 0.98]
0.7573
0.0019
Table 4: Sensitivity of k-means purity to feature-selection cutoffs. N (intersect) is the number of
features common to each configuration and the current 2048-feature set. Mean purity and standard
deviation are over 10 random seeds.
E
Directed graph variant
GPT-2 is autoregressive: token i can attend only to positions j ≤i. Our default co-occurrence
graphs ignore this causal ordering by using undirected edges.
To probe whether respecting
temporal ordering changes the clustering, we construct a directed variant. The released code
(src/graph_construction.py, directed=True) supports recording true positional ordering at
graph-construction time, but rebuilding the full set of feature graphs would invalidate the cached
kernel matrix; we therefore use a faster post-hoc approximation here and leave the full re-run to
future work.
For each symmetric adjacency matrix we retain only its strict lower triangle (i > j). The top-tokens
list is ordered by frequency (most frequent at index 0), so this approximation directs edges from
less-frequent to more-frequent tokens, reflecting the intuition that a rarer contextual token tends to
precede a frequent trigger token in the autoregressive context window. We then apply a directed
variant of the WL-style kernel that aggregates in-neighbour and out-neighbour labels separately for
each node. The full implementation is in experiments/directed_graph_experiment.py.
Method
Overall
Alphabetic
ARI vs. undirected
Undirected WL-style (default)
0.757 ± 0.002
0.500
-
Directed WL-style (lower-triangular)
0.754 ± 0.000
n/a
0.123
Table 5: Directed versus undirected variants of the WL-style kernel (10 seeds, K = 10 clusters).
Alphabetic purity is "n/a" because no alphabetic-dominant cluster forms under the directed variant.
The directed variant achieves overall purity 0.754, comparable to the undirected baseline (0.757).
However, it fails to produce any alphabetic-dominant cluster across all 10 seeds: every cluster is
dominated by symbolic features. The low ARI (0.123) indicates that the two variants partition the
feature space quite differently despite similar overall purity: the lower-triangular approximation
discards roughly half of the co-occurrence signal. A more complete treatment would require raw
positional data during graph construction so that true temporal direction can be assigned to each edge.
F
Cross-corpus spot check on Python code
Although the main mixed-domain corpus already contains Python and JavaScript snippets, the paper’s
claim of "code-like template motifs" is worth probing on a focused code corpus. We run two
complementary spot checks.
Token-type analysis (Analysis A). We decode each cluster’s top tokens with the GPT-2 tokeniser and
classify each token as: Python keyword (def, class, for, etc.), operator (=, +, *, etc.), bracket/code-
structure character, number, alphabetic, punctuation, or other. The code-token ratio per cluster is
(Python keywords + operators + brackets) divided by total tokens across all features in the cluster
(Table 6).
Cluster
Size
Code ratio
Keywords
Operators
Brackets
289
0.331
946
7
0.325
755
1
0.324
1445
2
0.317
522
3
0.310
296
5
0.310
425
0
0.309
658
8
0.304
483
9
0.297
456
4
0.294
425
Table 6: Code-token ratio per WL-style cluster (Analysis A). Clusters 6 and 7 carry the highest
concentration of Python keywords, operators, and brackets (33.1% and 32.5%). Cross-cluster
differences are modest, so the result should be read as suggestive rather than conclusive.
Small-scale code corpus run (Analysis B). We generate a Python code corpus of 600 synthesised
snippets drawn from 33 diverse templates (function definitions, class definitions, loops, list compre-
hensions, decorators, etc.); the resulting tokenised corpus is on the order of 104-105 tokens. We run
this corpus through GPT-2 Small with the SAE hooked at layer 6, apply the same feature-selection
criteria as in the main experiments, and intersect the resulting active features with the original 2048.
We subset the WL-style kernel matrix to this intersection, re-run kernel PCA + k-means (K = 10),
and compare the cluster assignments against the main-corpus clustering via ARI and NMI (Table 7).
Metric
Value
Code-corpus snippets
SAE features active on code
23,591 / 24,576
Intersection with original 2048
2,030 (99.1%)
ARI vs. main-corpus clustering
0.944
NMI vs. main-corpus clustering
0.928
Code-corpus cluster purity
0.761
Table 7: Cross-corpus spot check (Analysis B). High ARI (0.944) and NMI (0.928) against the
clustering obtained on the main mixed-domain corpus indicate that the cluster structure is largely
stable when activations are recomputed on a focused Python-code corpus. This is a small-scale check
on generated Python templates; an evaluation on a naturalistic code corpus such as The Stack [19]
remains future work.