Learning to Cut: Reinforcement Learning for Benders
Decomposition
Haochen Cai
Department of Integrated Systems Engineering
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA, 43210
cai.1256@osu.edu
Xian Yu
Department of Integrated Systems Engineering
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA, 43210
yu.3610@osu.edu
Abstract
Benders decomposition (BD) is a widely used solution approach for solving two-
stage stochastic programs arising in real-world decision-making under uncertainty.
However, it often suffers from slow convergence as the master problem grows with
an increasing number of cuts. In this paper, we propose Reinforcement Learning
for BD (RLBD), a framework that adaptively selects cuts using a neural network-
based stochastic policy. The policy is trained using a policy gradient method via
the REINFORCE algorithm. We evaluate the proposed approach on a two-stage
stochastic electric vehicle charging station location problem and compare it with
vanilla BD and LearnBD [Jia and Shen, 2021], a supervised learning approach that
classifies cuts using a support vector machine. Numerical results demonstrate that
RLBD achieves substantial improvements in computational efficiency and exhibits
strong generalization to problems with similar structures but varying data inputs
and decision variable dimensions.
Introduction
Two-stage stochastic programs provide a general framework for modeling decision-making under
uncertainty, where decisions are separated into here-and-now (first-stage) decisions, made before
uncertainty is realized, and wait-and-see (second-stage) decisions, which adapt to observed outcomes
through recourse actions after the uncertainty unfolds. This modeling paradigm has been widely
used in a broad range of applications, including facility location problems [Magnanti and Wong,
1981, Fischetti et al., 2016, 2017a], supply chain management [Keyvanshokooh et al., 2016, Basciftci
et al., 2023], scheduling and routing problems [Adulyasak et al., 2015, Bodur and Luedtke, 2017,
Yu et al., 2021, 2023], energy system operations [Alguacil and Conejo, 2000, Wang et al., 2011,
Daneshvar et al., 2020], among others. A key challenge in these problems is that the second-stage
decisions depend on random realizations, leading to large-scale optimization models. As the number
of scenarios increases, directly solving the resulting extensive-form problem becomes computationally
prohibitive.
Benders decomposition (BD) has emerged as a popular method for solving two-stage stochastic
programs by decomposing the original problem into a master problem and a set of subproblems
[Benders, 1962]. Specifically, at each iteration, the algorithm generates cuts that approximate the
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.06516v1 [math.OC] 7 May 2026

recourse function (the second-stage value function) and iteratively tighten the master problem. As a
result, the computational performance of BD depends critically on the quality of the cuts that are
added during this iterative process. In the multi-cut formulation, the algorithm generates separate
cuts for each scenario or subproblem, producing a tighter and more accurate representation of the
recourse function; however, adding all of them can significantly increase the size of the master
problem and slow down subsequent solves. On the other hand, in the single-cut formulation, all
subproblem (scenario-wise) information is aggregated into one cut per iteration, leading to a smaller
master problem but potentially weaker approximations of the recourse function. This introduces a
trade-off between strengthening the master problem and maintaining computational efficiency. We
refer to Birge and Louveaux [2011] for a detailed introduction of these two formulations.
In this work, we model cut selection in BD as a sequential decision-making problem. At each
iteration, the state encodes current convergence statistics, along with features of the master problem,
subproblems, and individual cuts, while the action corresponds to selecting a subset of candidate
cuts to add to the master problem. Based on this formulation, we develop a reinforcement learning
(RL) approach that trains an optimal cut-selection policy using policy gradient algorithms. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Stochastic cut-selection policy. Different than the existing literature in BD that selects
cuts deterministically, we consider a stochastic policy that selects each cut with a certain
probability, based on global algorithmic information and local cut features. This allows
the policy to exploit the most informative cuts given the current information while still
maintaining the ability to explore alternative cuts that may become important later.
• Strong generalization to problems with similar structures. Our numerical results demon-
strate that the trained cut-selection policy exhibits strong generalization to problems with
similar structures but different data inputs and decision variable dimensions.
• Substantial improvements over existing benchmarks. Compared to existing benchmarks
such as vanilla BD and LearnBD [Jia and Shen, 2021], our RLBD reduces computational
time by up to a factor of five on most testing instances and achieves smaller optimality gaps
when all methods fail to converge within the prescribed time limit.
Related Work
A variety of classical techniques have been developed to accelerate the convergence of BD. Among
them, cut management is a key technique that carefully controls which cuts to add and retain in
the master problem. Instead of adding all candidate cuts from solving the subproblems, many
approaches add only a selected set of informative cuts at each iteration, such as the most violated
cuts or the Pareto-optimal cuts, to improve convergence without excessively enlarging the master
problem [Magnanti and Wong, 1981, Fischetti et al., 2017b]. Another widely used heuristic is to
remove redundant or inactive cuts that no longer contribute to tightening the formulation, thereby
controlling the size of the master problem. On the other hand, scenario grouping techniques have been
studied in the literature to improve computational efficiency by aggregating multiple cuts from similar
scenarios [Adulyasak et al., 2015, Maheo et al., 2019, Ramírez-Pico et al., 2023]. An alternative
stream of research focuses on reducing the solution time per iteration by solving the master problem
or subproblem inexactly, leading to the so-called inexact BD [Geoffrion and Graves, 1974, Easwaran
and Üster, 2009, Poojari and Beasley, 2009].
Recent works have explored integrating machine learning (ML) and RL into BD to improve its
efficiency. Jia and Shen [2021] proposed a learning-enhanced framework (LearnBD) that trains a
support vector machine to classify cuts and selectively adds those likely to be valuable to the master
problem, thereby reducing the size of the master problem. Choi et al. [2025] replaced the exact
subproblem solver with a pretrained transformer model, accelerating the convergence of BD by
generating high-quality approximate solutions for the subproblems. Different than these ML-based
prediction models, Li et al. [2025] applied RL to learn policies to adaptively select optimality gap
tolerance for the master problem based on the features of the problem and the solution progress in
inexact BD. Mana et al. [2023] replaced the master problem with an RL-based surrogate to generate
candidate solutions, without relying on repeatedly solving expensive master problems.
In a different line of work, researchers have also investigated ML and RL approaches for general-
purpose optimization algorithms. For example, ML has been leveraged to solve combinatorial
optimization problems [Bengio et al., 2021, Khalil et al., 2017, Li et al., 2018, Khalil et al., 2016].
Recently, Bello et al. [2017] proposed Neural Combinatorial Optimization, a framework that leverages
policy gradient methods to train neural networks for generating high-quality solutions to traveling
salesman problems. Tang et al. [2020] introduced a deep RL formulation to adaptively select cuts
within a branch-and-cut framework for solving integer programs. Chi et al. [2022] proposed a deep
RL approach for column generation, where the column selection process is modeled as a sequential
decision-making problem and optimized using Q-learning.
Preliminaries
In this section, we review the two-stage stochastic programming framework in Section 3.1, and the
classical BD in Section 3.2, respectively.
3.1
Two-Stage Stochastic Programming
We consider a class of two-stage stochastic programming problems, where in the first stage, a decision
vector x ∈X ⊆Rn1 is chosen before the realization of uncertainty, and in the second stage, a
recourse decision y ∈Rn2 is made after observing the realization of the uncertain parameter ξ. The
two-stage stochastic program can be written as minx∈X cTx + Eξ[Q(x, ξ)], where c ∈Rn1 is the
first-stage cost vector, and Eξ[·] denotes the expectation with respect to the distribution of ξ. Here,
given the first-stage decision x and uncertainty realization ξ, the second-stage recourse function
Q(x, ξ) is defined as Q(x, ξ) := miny{qTy | Wy ≥h −Tx}, where the uncertain parameter ξ
includes the data (W, h, T, q).
We assume that the uncertain parameter ξ can take values from a finite scenario set Ω, where each
scenario ω ∈Ωcorresponds to a realization ξω = (W ω, hω, T ω, qω) with probability pω, satisfying
P
ω∈Ωpω = 1. Then, a sample average approximation (SAA) to the two-stage stochastic program
can be written as
min
x∈X cTx +
X
ω∈Ω
pωQω(x),
(1)
where
Qω(x) := min
y
(qω)Ty
s.t.
W ωy ≥hω −T ωx.
(2)
To ensure a well-defined problem, we further assume that the second-stage problem (2) is always
feasible (i.e., satisfies relatively complete recourse) and that the recourse function is finite, i.e.,
|Qω(x)| < +∞for all x ∈X and ω ∈Ω. Our goal is to develop an efficient solution approach for
the SAA problem (1).
3.2
Benders Decomposition
The extensive-form SAA (1) becomes computationally challenging when the number of scenarios
increases. BD exploits its separable structure by decomposing it into a master problem and a set of
scenario-wise subproblems. At each iteration t, we first solve the following master problem (MPt):
(MPt)
min
x∈X,θ
cTx +
X
ω∈Ω
pωθω
s.t.
θω ≥(πω
τ )T(hω −T ωx),
∀τ ∈[t −1], ω ∈Ω,
(3)
where θω ≥(πω
τ )T(hω −T ωx), ∀τ ∈[t −1], ω ∈Ωdenote the current optimality cuts to
approximate the recourse function Qω(x) from below, and no cuts are present when t = 1. The
problem (MPt) is solved to obtain an optimal first-stage solution (ˆxt, ˆθt) together with a lower bound
to the original problem (1). Given ˆxt, we construct the following dual of the subproblem for each
scenario ω ∈Ω:
(SPω
t )
max
πω≥0 (πω)T(hω −T ωˆxt)
s.t.
(W ω)Tπω = qω.
(4)
We denote the optimal solution of (4) as πω
t . By strong duality, Qω(ˆxt) = (πω
t )T(hω −T ωˆxt),
and since ˆxt is a feasible first-stage solution, cTˆxt + P
ω∈ΩpωQω(ˆxt) provides an upper bound for
(1). The optimal dual solutions {πω
t }ω∈Ωare then used to generate Benders optimality cuts of the
following form
θω ≥(πω
t )T(hω −T ωx),
∀ω ∈Ω,
(5)
which provide valid lower approximations of the recourse function. If the current (MPt)’s optimal
solution (ˆxt, ˆθt) satisfies the newly generated cuts (5), then we terminate the algorithm and return
(ˆxt, ˆθt) as the optimal solution. Otherwise, we add the optimality cuts (5) to the master problem and
proceed to the next iteration. This iterative process converges to a globally optimal solution in a finite
number of iterations under mild conditions, as shown in Van Slyke and Wets [1969].
Despite its effectiveness, classical BD often suffers from slow convergence. In particular, the number
of generated cuts can grow rapidly, leading to computationally expensive master problems. Motivated
by this computational challenge, we develop an RL framework to speed up the BD algorithm next.
Reinforcement Learning for Benders Decomposition
In this section, we propose Reinforcement Learning for Benders Decomposition (RLBD), a framework
that adaptively selects Benders cuts to improve computational efficiency. Unlike classical BD, which
either adds all scenario-wise cuts or aggregates them into a single cut at each iteration, RLBD
formulates cut selection as a sequential decision-making problem and learns a policy to select the
most informative cuts at each iteration (see Figure 1 for an illustration). We first introduce the MDP
formulation in Section 4.1 and the neural network policy parameterization in Section 4.2, respectively.
The RLBD framework consists of two phases: (i) Training, where the stochastic cut-selection policy
is learned using a policy gradient method via REINFORCE (Section 4.3), and (ii) Testing, where the
trained policy is applied in a greedy manner to new problem instances via policy rollout (Section 4.4).
Figure 1: The RLBD Framework.
4.1
Markov Decision Process Formulation
We model the cut-selection problem in BD as a finite-horizon discounted MDP. In this formulation,
each Benders iteration corresponds to one decision step. At iteration t, the agent observes the current
master problem (RLBD-MPt):
(RLBD-MPt)
min
x∈X,θ
cTx +
X
ω∈Ω
pωθω
s.t.
θω ≥(πω
τ )T(hω −T ωx),
∀τ ∈[t −1], ω ∈Aτ.
(6)
Unlike (MPt) in classical BD (3), where all scenario-wise cuts ω ∈Ωare included, we instead
maintain only a subset Aτ ⊂Ωfor all τ ∈[t −1]. Moreover, the selected subset Aτ may vary
across iterations. The agent solves (RLBD-MPt) to obtain an optimal solution (ˆxt, ˆθt) and an optimal
objective value, which serves as a lower bound for problem (1), denoted by LBt. Based on (ˆxt, ˆθt), the
agent then solves the same subproblem (SPω
t ) in (4) and generates scenario-wise cuts of the form (5)
for all ω ∈Ω. Since the first-stage solution ˆxt is feasible for (1) and Qω(ˆxt) = (πω
t )T(hω −T ωˆxt),
the agent constructs an upper bound for problem (1), defined by UBt := cTˆxt+P
ω∈Ωpω(πω
t )T(hω−
T ωˆxt). Then, the agent selects a subset of candidate cuts At ⊂Ω, and the environment advances to
the next iteration t + 1 by adding the selected cuts At to (6).
Formally, the finite-horizon discounted MDP is defined by the tuple (S, A, f, r, γ, T), where S is the
state space, A is the action space, f : S × A →S represents the transition dynamics induced by the
Benders solver, r(s, a) is the step-wise reward function, γ ∈(0, 1] is the discount factor, and T is the
number of decision stages. Next, we introduce each component in detail.
4.1.1
State Space
At each iteration t, the state representation contains both global information about the current
convergence statistics, master problem and subproblem features, shared by all candidate cuts, and
local information about each candidate cut.
Convergence statistics. The state includes the current iteration index t, lower bound LBt, upper
bound UBt, and the current optimality gap, defined by Gapt := (UBt −LBt)/(|UBt| + ϵ). It also
includes changes in the lower/upper bounds and the optimality gap, defined by ∆LBt := LBt−LBt−1,
∆UBt := UBt−1 −UBt, and ∆Gapt := Gapt−1 −Gapt, respectively. Based on them, the state
further includes the gap reduction rate ρGap
t
:= ∆Gapt/(Gapt−1 + ϵ), lower-bound improvement
rate ρLB
t
:= ∆LBt/(|LBt−1| + ϵ), and upper-bound improvement rate ρUB
t
:= ∆UBt/(|UBt−1| + ϵ),
which characterize the convergence statistics of the Benders procedure across iterations. Here, ϵ > 0
is a small positive constant, which is added in the denominator to avoid numerical instability. For
each candidate cut of the form (5) generated at iteration t, we denote the cut-level violation at the
current master solution (ˆxt, ˆθt) as vω
t := (πω
t )T(hω −T ωˆxt) −ˆθω
t for all ω ∈Ω. We then record the
mean violation ¯vt := P
ω∈Ωpωvω
t and the maximum violation vmax
t
:= maxω∈Ωvω
t , which reflect
the approximation quality of the cuts. Note that ¯vt and vmax
t
represent the global information, and we
will include the cut-level violation vω
t in the local state component, introduced later.
Master problem features. The state includes the number of cuts added in the previous iteration K,
the cumulative number of cuts added Ccum
t
, and the solve time for (RLBD-MPt), denoted by T MP
t
.
These features reflect the size and computational burden of the master problem.
Subproblem features. After solving the scenario-wise subproblems (4), the state records summary
statistics of the scenario-wise recourse costs. Let Qω
t denote the optimal objective value for (SPω
t )
in (4) under the current first-stage solution (ˆxt, ˆθt). We include the average recourse cost ¯Qt =
P
ω∈ΩpωQω
t , the maximum recourse cost Qmax
t
= maxω∈ΩQω
t , the minimum recourse cost Qmin
t
=
minω∈ΩQω
t , and the standard deviation of the scenario-wise recourse costs {Qω
t }ω∈Ω.
Cut-level features. The cut-level state is given by (vω
t , ∥πω
t ∥2, |(πω
t )Thω|, ∥(πω
t )TT ω∥2, NCω
t )
for each ω ∈Ω, where vω
t is the cut-level violation, πω
t is the optimal dual variable used to
generate the cut, (πω
t )Thω and (πω
t )TT ω represent the intercept and coefficient of the cut, and
NCω
t := Pt−1
τ=1 1{ω ∈Aτ} records the number of cuts generated by the same scenario ω in previous
iterations, respectively. These local features capture the quality of each candidate cut, while the
global features track the current convergence status.
The initial state s1 is obtained from solving the master problem (RLBD-MP1) without any cuts. The
initial LB1, UB1, Gap1, cut violation statistics, and recourse-related statistics are computed from
solving the initial master problem and subproblems. The history-dependent features, such as gap
reduction and bound improvement rates, are initialized to zero because no previous iteration exists.
4.1.2
Action Space, Transition Dynamics, and Reward Function
Action Space. At each iteration t, we use {1, 2, . . . , |Ω|} to encode all candidate cuts, each cor-
responding to one optimality cut of the form (5) with coefficients obtained from solving the sub-
problem (4) for scenario ω ∈Ω. The action corresponds to selecting a subset of K cuts from
{1, 2, . . . , |Ω|} to be added to the master problem. To this end, we model the action space as
A = {A ⊂{1, 2, . . . , |Ω|} : |A| = K}. Note that the same cut index at ∈Ωmay correspond to
different cuts in different iterations t, because even for the same scenario, the cut coefficients obtained
from solving the subproblem (4) can vary depending on the first-stage solution.
We use πθ(at|st) to denote the probability of selecting cut at ∈{1, 2, . . . , |Ω|} given state st.
Note that since the iteration index t is included in state st, this policy πθ(at|st) is naturally time-
dependent. Given state st, we sample an ordered sequence At = (a(1)
t , a(2)
t , . . . , a(K)
t
) following
πθ(·|st) without replacement. The sampling is performed sequentially: after one cut is selected, it is
masked out, and the remaining probabilities are re-normalized before the next cut is sampled. The
joint probability of action At ∈A is thus given by Pθ(At|st) = QK
i=1
πθ(a(i)
t
|st)
1−P
j<i πθ(a(j)
t
|st).
This stochastic cut-selection policy naturally introduces exploration through the policy distribution.
Unlike deterministic selection rules, the use of a stochastic policy allows the agent to sample actions
according to their relative importance, assigning higher probability to more promising cuts while
retaining the ability to explore alternative candidates. We will introduce a neural network architecture
to parameterize πθ(at|st) based on both global information and cut-level features in Section 4.2.
Transition Dynamics. Given the current state st and action At, the environment advances to the next
state st+1 = f(st, At) by adding the selected cuts At to the master problem (6). The updated master
problem (RLBD-MPt+1) is re-optimized to obtain a new first-stage solution. Based on this solution,
we solve the subproblems (SPω
t+1) for all scenarios ω ∈Ωand generate a new set of candidate cuts.
The resulting information from the master problem and subproblems, including updated bounds,
optimality gap, violation, and other summary statistics, is used to construct the next state st+1.
Reward Function. The step-wise reward is defined as r(st, At) := α · Ft + β · Lt −λ, where
Ft denotes the gap-based reward term, Lt denotes the reward associated with the master problem
solve time, and −λ is a per-step penalty. First of all, the gap-based reward is defined by Ft :=
log(Gapt−1) −log(Gapt), which is scale-invariant and designed to reflect the convergence progress
of BD. Second, Lt := −T MP
t
Tref , where T MP
t
is the master problem solve time at iteration t, and Tref
is a normalization constant chosen based on the problem scale. Finally, the per-step penalty −λ
is introduced to encourage convergence within fewer iterations, which accumulates over time and
imposes an increasing penalty on prolonged solution trajectories. Note that the parameters α, β and
λ are user-defined weights that balance these components and will be tuned in Section 5.2.
Combining all components above, the value function of this MDP takes the following form:
max
θ
Vθ(s1) := E
" T
X
t=1
γtr(st, At)
#
, where At ∼Pθ(·|st), st+1 = f(st, At), ∀t ∈[T].
4.2
Neural Network Policy Parameterization
We parameterize the cut-selection policy πθ(at|st) using a shared feedforward neural network (see
Figure 2). The purpose of the network is to assign a scalar score to each candidate cut, which is later
converted into a probability distribution for stochastic cut selection. Specifically, at iteration t, for each
candidate cut ω ∈Ω, we construct a cut-specific state representation sω
t ∈R28. The first 23 entries
of sω
t include the global state information shared by all candidate cuts, and the last 5 entries describe
the local properties of candidate cut ω, given by (vω
t , ∥πω
t ∥2, |(πω
t )Thω|, ∥(πω
t )TT ω∥2, NCω
t ).
Each input vector sω
t is passed through a multilayer perceptron with two hidden layers and ReLU
activations: zω = NNθ(sω
t ) = W3 · ReLU(W2 · ReLU(W1sω
t + b1) + b2) + b3, for all ω ∈Ω, where
θ = (Wl, bl)3
l=1 denotes the network parameters, and zω ∈R is the output logit assigned to candidate
cut ω. Given the logits produced by the neural network, we apply a softmax function to transform
them into a probability distribution: πθ(·|st) = Softmax(z1, z2, . . . , z|Ω|). Here, πθ(ω|st) denotes
the probability of selecting cut ω, which is used to construct the joint action probability Pθ(At|st).
Figure 2: The shared neural network is applied to each candidate cut using the concatenation of
common state vector and local cut features, producing one logit per candidate cut.
Algorithm 1: Training Cut-Selection Policy via REINFORCE
Input
:Training problem, initial policy network parameter θ, discount factor γ, number of cuts added per
iteration K, maximum iterations Tmax, number of episodes E, learning rate η, optimality gap
tolerance ϵtol, reward weights α, β, λ, reference master problem solve time Tref
Output :Trained cut-selection policy πθ
1 for e = 1, . . . , E do
Initialize the master problem (RLBD-MP1) based on the training problem without any cuts;
for t = 1, . . . , Tmax do
Solve (RLBD-MPt) to obtain an optimal solution (ˆxt, ˆθt) and a lower bound LBt;
Based on (ˆxt, ˆθt), solve (SPω
t ) to construct candidate cuts (5) and obtain an upper bound UBt;
Construct state st according to the global information and cut-level features;
Compute policy distribution πθ(·|st) = Softmax(NNθ(s1
t), . . . , NNθ(s|Ω|
t
));
Sample K cuts following πθ(·|st) without replacement and set the selected subset as action At;
Compute the stepwise reward rt = r(st, At) = α · Ft + β · Lt −λ;
Add the selected cuts At to the master problem and advance to the next iteration;
if (UBt −LBt)/|UBt| < ϵtol then
break;
Compute the return-to-go backward: GT = 0 and Gt = rt + γGt+1 for t = T −1, . . . , 0;
Update the policy parameter: θ ←θ + η PT
t=1 ∇θ log Pθ(At | st) · Gt;
15 return πθ.
4.3
Training: Policy Gradient Algorithm via REINFORCE
In this section, we leverage policy gradient methods to train the stochastic cut-selection policy πθ via
the REINFORCE algorithm [Williams, 1992] (see Algorithm 1). One training episode corresponds
to one complete BD trajectory. During each episode, at each iteration t, the algorithm records the
current state st, the selected cuts At, their log-probabilities log Pθ(At|st), and the stepwise reward rt.
After the episode terminates (either BD converges or hits the maximum iterations Tmax), the return-
to-go is computed for each step: Gt = PT
ℓ=t γℓ−trℓ. According to Williams [1992], the gradient
of the value function Vθ(s1) can be estimated as ∇θVθ(s1) ≈E[PT
t=1 ∇θ log Pθ(At|st) · Gt],
where ∇θ log Pθ(At|st) = PK
i=1 ∇θ log(
πθ(a(i)
t
|st)
1−P
j<i πθ(a(j)
t
|st)). At the end of each episode, we apply
backpropagation to update the policy network parameter θ in the gradient ascent direction.
4.4
Testing: Policy Rollout using the Trained Cut-Selection Greedy Policy
Once the cut-selection policy πθ is trained, it can be applied to solve problems with similar structures
but different inputs. We consider a setting in which a decision maker needs to repeatedly solve a
collection of two-stage stochastic programs that share the same problem structure but differ in their
realizations of uncertain parameters and/or dimensions of the decision variables. This setting naturally
arises in applications where similar decision problems must be solved under different scenarios or
operating conditions. For example, in supply chain management, one may solve a sequence of
stochastic facility location problems that share the same objective function and constraints but differ
in demand realizations or decision dimensions. Since the policy network πθ is designed to be
independent of the problem size, it can naturally generalize to such instances with different demand
realizations and varying numbers of candidate facilities and customer sites. For a given test problem,
we then implement BD with the trained cut-selection policy in a greedy manner: at each iteration, we
select the top-K cuts with the largest logits from the policy network to add to the master problem.
Numerical Results
We test our RLBD on a two-stage stochastic electric vehicle (EV) charging station location problem
and compare it with existing benchmarks. We first introduce our experimental setup in Section
5.1, report the hyperparameter tuning results in Section 5.2, and compare our RLBD with other
benchmarks in Section 5.3, respectively. Finally, we provide some managerial insights from the
trained cut-selection policy in Section 5.4.
5.1
Experimental Setup
We consider a two-stage stochastic EV charging station location problem, where we have a set I
of candidate charging stations and a set J of customer sites with uncertain demand dj, j ∈J . In
the first stage, a subset of charging stations is selected to open, and their capacities are determined
before demand realization. In the second stage, demand is realized and fulfilled by the open stations.
The objective is to minimize first-stage investment costs and second-stage transportation and unmet-
demand penalties, while maximizing total revenue. In the training phase, we generate |I| = 8
candidate charging stations and |J | = 12 customer sites. For each customer site j ∈J , the demand
dj follows a Normal distribution. We first sample µj uniformly from [20, 100] and set σj = 0.1µj and
then generate |Ω| = 100 demand scenarios {dω
j }ω∈Ωfollowing N(µj, σ2
j ). This forms our training
problem. Please refer to (7)-(13) in Appendix A for the full model formulation and parameter setup.
We train the policy network using the Adam optimizer, with learning rate 10−3, and discount factor
γ = 0.99. All experiments are conducted on the Pitzer cluster at the Ohio Supercomputer Center with
16 CPU cores. We use Gurobi 12.0.0 coded in Python 3.10 for solving all optimization problems.
5.2
Training: Hyperparameter Tuning
We first tune the hyperparameters in defining the reward function. We fix β = 0.001 and Tref =
0.1 and perform a grid search over the other weight parameters α ∈{0.01, 0.1, 1.0} and λ ∈
{0.001, 0.01, 0.1}, resulting in nine reward configurations. For each configuration, we train the
policy network in five independent runs and evaluate the learned cut-selection policies in a greedy
manner on the same training problem. The evaluation results are summarized in Figure 3, where
we plot the episodic elapsed time, final optimality gap, and number of Benders iterations across
different reward configurations. The shaded area represents the 90% confidence interval among the
five independent runs. Based on these curves, α = 0.01 and λ = 0.001 perform the best in all three
metrics, and we fix α = 0.01 and λ = 0.001 in the following experiments.
After fixing the reward setting, we now tune the number of cuts added per iteration K from
{10, 20, 30}. The average evaluation results over five independent runs are shown in Figure 4,
where we report the overall trends of elapsed time, final optimality gap, and the number of Benders
iterations under different values of K. Note that in these experiments, even under the same initialized
policy, different values of K lead to different BD performance, and therefore, the three curves do not
start from the same initial point. We also provide additional results of total reward and their close-up
in Figures 6 in Appendix B. Overall, K = 10 achieves the most stable convergence behavior and
computational efficiency, and we adopt K = 10 in the next benchmark experiments.
(a) Elapsed Time
(b) Final Optimality Gap
(c) Number of Steps
Figure 3: Hyperparameter tuning results under different combinations of α and λ.
5.3
Testing: Comparison with Existing Benchmarks
Once the cut-selection policy πθ is trained in our RLBD framework, we apply it to solve testing
instances with various demand distributions and problem sizes and compare it with the following
benchmarks: (i) vanilla BD presented in Section 3.2; and (ii) LearnBD proposed in Jia and Shen
[2021], where we train a support vector machine classifier on the same training problem. We consider
several distribution-shift settings in which we sample |Ω| = 100 testing demand scenarios from the
same Normal distribution as the training problem, as well as from left-skewed and right-skewed
Normal distributions.
(a) Elapsed Time
(b) Final Optimality Gap
(c) Number of Steps
Figure 4: Evaluation results under different numbers of cuts added per iteration K.
Table 1 summarizes the comparison between BD, LearnBD, and RLBD on different testing instances,
where we report the average solution time (Time), master problem solve time (Master), number of
iterations (Iter.), and the final optimality gap (Gap) over five independent testing datasets. The time
limit is set to one hour and the optimality gap tolerance is set to ϵtol = 1% for all instances. From
Table 1, when |I| × |J | = 8 × 12 or 10 × 15, all methods solve the problem to the prescribed
optimality gap tolerance, while RLBD achieves approximately a fivefold reduction in computational
time. This improvement is primarily due to smaller master problems with adaptive cut selection (see
the "Master" column). When the problem size increases to |I| × |J | = 20 × 30, none of the methods
can solve the problem within one hour; however, RLBD attains a smaller final optimality gap.
Table 1: Performance comparison between BD, LearnBD, and RLBD on testing instances with
various demand distributions and problem sizes
|I| × |J |
Method
Normal
Left-skewed Normal
Right-skewed Normal
Time (s)
Master (s)
Iter.
Gap (%)
Time (s)
Master (s)
Iter.
Gap (%)
Time (s)
Master (s)
Iter.
Gap (%)
8 × 12
BD
237.63
222.03
90.2
0.55
244.52
227.63
90.6
0.57
252.60
234.63
90.4
0.56
LearnBD
234.77
212.56
124.2
0.55
239.75
215.14
125.0
0.57
246.73
221.81
124.6
0.56
RLBD
44.43
25.62
106.6
0.95
46.00
26.39
108.0
0.90
48.32
27.16
106.6
0.87
10 × 15
BD
446.70
418.17
121.4
0.69
436.67
404.55
118.4
0.87
454.84
423.42
122.2
0.82
LearnBD
448.74
408.87
163.8
0.71
440.99
396.62
161.2
0.87
453.92
410.03
164.2
0.82
RLBD
97.37
60.25
154.4
0.86
102.26
62.00
151.4
0.97
102.77
62.66
150.8
0.79
20 × 30
BD
3600
185.0
38.89
3600
185.8
35.48
3600
186.4
39.07
LearnBD
3600
210.2
38.64
3600
210.2
35.45
3600
211.6
39.07
RLBD
3600
325.2
28.39
3600
329.0
29.41
3600
332.0
29.21
5.4
Managerial Insights from the Learned Cut-Selection Policy
To understand the relationship between the behavior of the trained cut-selection policy πθ in RLBD
and the characteristics of the input dataset, we rank the scenarios based on the number of cuts
generated by each scenario across all iterations (NCω
T ) and plot their corresponding total demand
P
j∈J dω
j , total penalty exposure P
j∈J pjdω
j , and total revenue exposure P
j∈J rjdω
j in Figure 5.
On the x-axis, scenarios are sorted by the selected count NCω
T in descending order, where Scenario
#1 corresponds to the most frequently selected scenario. We focus on the testing instance with
right-skewed Normal distribution and |I| × |J | = 10 × 15. From Figure 5, the trained policy tends
to select cuts from scenarios with higher total demand, penalty exposure, and revenue exposure,
suggesting that high-load demand realizations correspond to more critical scenarios and are more
likely to generate informative cuts.
Conclusions
In this work, we proposed an RLBD framework for adaptively selecting Benders cuts to improve
the efficiency of solving two-stage stochastic programs. The cut-selection process was modeled as
an MDP, and the stochastic cut-selection policy was trained using the REINFORCE algorithm. The
learned policy can be deployed on testing instances with varying uncertainty distributions and problem
sizes. Numerical experiments on a stochastic EV charging station location problem demonstrated that
RLBD generalizes effectively to problems with similar structures but different data inputs (including
distribution shifts) and decision variable dimensions. Compared with existing benchmark methods,
(a) Total Demand
(b) Total Penalty Exposure
(c) Total Revenue Exposure
Figure 5: Scenario-level exposure metrics sorted by scenario rank.
RLBD achieves up to a fivefold reduction in computational time in small to medium testing instances
and obtains smaller optimality gaps in larger testing instances.
References
Yossiri Adulyasak, Jean-François Cordeau, and Raf Jans. Benders decomposition for production
routing under demand uncertainty. Operations Research, 63(4):851-867, 2015.
N. Alguacil and A. J. Conejo. Multiperiod optimal power flow using benders decomposition. IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, 15(1):196-201, 2000. doi: 10.1109/59.852121.
Beste Basciftci, Xian Yu, and Siqian Shen. Resource distribution under spatiotemporal uncertainty
of disease spread: Stochastic versus robust approaches. Computers & Operations Research, 149:
106028, 2023.
Irwan Bello, Hieu Pham, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi, and Samy Bengio. Neural combinatorial
optimization with reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2017.
J. F. Benders. Partitioning procedures for solving mixed-variables programming problems. Nu-
merische Mathematik, 4:238-252, 1962. doi: 10.1007/BF01386316. URL 
10.1007/BF01386316.
Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. Machine learning for combinatorial optimization:
A methodological tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research, 290(2):405-421,
2021.
John R. Birge and François Louveaux. Introduction to Stochastic Programming. Springer, 2011.
Merve Bodur and James R Luedtke. Mixed-integer rounding enhanced benders decomposition
for multiclass service-system staffing and scheduling with arrival rate uncertainty. Management
Science, 63(7):2073-2091, 2017.
Cheng Chi, Amine Mohamed Aboussalah, Elias B. Khalil, Juyoung Wang, and Zoha Sherkat-
Masoumi. A deep reinforcement learning framework for column generation. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Seung Jin Choi, Kimiya Jozani, Joshua F Cooper, and I Esra Buyuktahtakin. Learning to optimize at
scale: A Benders decomposition-transformers framework for stochastic combinatorial optimization.
In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop MLxOR: Mathematical Foundations and Operational Integration of
Machine Learning for Uncertainty-Aware Decision-Making, 2025.
Mohammadreza Daneshvar, Behnam Mohammadi-Ivatloo, Kazem Zare, and Somayeh Asadi. Two-
stage stochastic programming model for optimal scheduling of the wind-thermal-hydropower-
pumped storage system considering the flexibility assessment. Energy, 193:116657, 2020.
Gopalakrishnan Easwaran and Halit Üster. Tabu search and Benders decomposition approaches for
a capacitated closed-loop supply chain network design problem. Transportation Science, 43(3):
301-320, 2009.
Matteo Fischetti, Ivana Ljubi´c, and Markus Sinnl. Benders decomposition without separability: A
computational study for capacitated facility location problems. European Journal of Operational
Research, 253(3):557-569, 2016.
Matteo Fischetti, Ivana Ljubi´c, and Markus Sinnl. Redesigning Benders decomposition for large-scale
facility location. Management Science, 63(7):2146-2162, 2017a.
Matteo Fischetti, Domenico Salvagnin, and Andrea Zanette. A note on the selection of Benders’ cuts.
Mathematical Programming, 161(1-2):407-415, 2017b.
Arthur M Geoffrion and Glenn W Graves. Multicommodity distribution system design by benders
decomposition. Management Science, 20(5):822-844, 1974.
Huiwen Jia and Siqian Shen. Benders cut classification via support vector machines for solving
two-stage stochastic programs. INFORMS Journal on Optimization, 3(3):278-297, 2021.
Esmaeil Keyvanshokooh, Sarah M Ryan, and Elnaz Kabir. Hybrid robust and stochastic optimization
for closed-loop supply chain network design using accelerated Benders decomposition. European
Journal of Operational Research, 249(1):76-92, 2016.
Elias Khalil, Pierre Le Bodic, Le Song, George Nemhauser, and Bistra Dilkina. Learning to branch
in mixed integer programming. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 30, 2016.
Elias Khalil, Hanjun Dai, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. Learning combinatorial
optimization algorithms over graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
2017.
Zhe Li, Bernard T. Agyeman, Ilias Mitrai, and Prodromos Daoutidis. Learning to control inexact
Benders decomposition via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06700, 2025.
Zhuwen Li, Qifeng Chen, and Vladlen Koltun. Combinatorial optimization with graph convolutional
networks and guided tree search. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Thomas L. Magnanti and Richard T. Wong. Accelerating Benders decomposition: Algorithmic
enhancement and model selection criteria. Operations Research, 29(3):464-484, 1981.
Arthur Maheo, Philip Kilby, and Pascal Van Hentenryck. Benders decomposition for the design of a
hub and shuttle public transit system. Transportation Science, 53(1):77-88, 2019.
Kyle Mana, Stephen Mak, Parisa Zehtabi, Michael Cashmore, Daniele Magazzeni, and Manuela
Veloso. Accelerating Benders decomposition via reinforcement learning surrogate models. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023.
Chandra A Poojari and John E Beasley. Improving Benders decomposition using a genetic algorithm.
European Journal of Operational Research, 199(1):89-97, 2009.
Cristian Ramírez-Pico, Ivana Ljubi´c, and Eduardo Moreno. Benders adaptive-cuts method for
two-stage stochastic programs. Transportation Science, 57(5):1252-1275, 2023.
Huangrong Sun, Xian Yu, and Guzin Bayraksan. Contextual stochastic optimization for determining
electric vehicle charging station locations with decision-dependent demand learning. Available at
SSRN 5078715, 2025.
Yunhao Tang, Shipra Agrawal, and Yuri Faenza. Reinforcement learning for integer programming:
Learning to cut. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9367-9376. PMLR,
2020.
Richard M Van Slyke and Roger Wets. L-shaped linear programs with applications to optimal control
and stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 17(4):638-663, 1969.
Qianfan Wang, Yongpei Guan, and Jianhui Wang. A chance-constrained two-stage stochastic program
for unit commitment with uncertain wind power output. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 27
(1):206-215, 2011.
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine Learning, 8(3-4):229-256, 1992.
Xian Yu, Siqian Shen, and Huizhu Wang. Integrated vehicle routing and service scheduling under time
and cancellation uncertainties with application in nonemergency medical transportation. Service
Science, 13(3):172-191, 2021.
Xian Yu, Siqian Shen, Babak Badri-Koohi, and Haitham Seada. Time window optimization for
attended home service delivery under multiple sources of uncertainties. Computers & Operations
Research, 150:106045, 2023.
Appendix
A
Two-stage Stochastic EV Charging Station Location problem
Let I, J , and Ωdenote the set of candidate charging stations, customer sites, and demand scenarios,
respectively. Define the first-stage decision variables as yi ∈{0, 1} and zi ∈Z+ for all i ∈I, where
yi = 1 if station i is selected to open and zi denotes the number of chargers installed at station i.
Define the second-stage decision variables xij and sj as the amount of demand at customer site
j ∈J fulfilled by charging station i and the unmet demand at customer site j for all i ∈I, j ∈J ,
respectively. Parameters fi, bi, cij, pj, rj, Ci denote the investment cost for opening station i ∈I,
unit cost for installing one charger at station i ∈I, unit transportation cost from station i ∈I to
customer site j ∈J, unit penalty for unmet demand at customer site j ∈J, unit revenue for demand
fulfillment at site j ∈J, and the maximum number of EV demand each charger can fulfill at location
i ∈I, respectively.
Following Sun et al. [2025], the two-stage stochastic EV charging station location model is given by
min
y,z
X
i∈I
fiyi +
X
i∈I
bizi + 1
|Ω|
X
ω∈Ω
Qω(z)
(7)
s.t.
zi ≤Miyi, ∀i ∈I
(8)
yi ∈{0, 1}, zi ∈Z+, ∀i ∈I
(9)
where constraints (8) enforce that chargers can be installed at location i ∈I only if a charging station
is opened there, and that the number of installed chargers at each location i is bounded above by Mi.
For each scenario ω ∈Ω, the recourse function is defined as
Qω(z) = min
x,u
X
i∈I
X
j∈J
cijxij +
X
j∈J
pjuj −
X
j∈J
rjdω
j
(10)
s.t.
X
i∈I
xij + uj = dω
j , ∀j ∈J
(11)
X
j∈J
xij ≤Cizi, ∀i ∈I
(12)
xij ≥0, uj ≥0, ∀i ∈I, j ∈J
(13)
where constraints (11) ensure that the demand at each customer site j ∈J is either satisfied by an
open charging station or accounted for as unmet demand. Constraints (12) enforce capacity limits
by requiring that the total demand served at each open station i ∈I does not exceed the product of
the number of installed chargers zi and the per-charger capacity Ci. Finally, constraints (13) impose
non-negativity on both satisfied and unmet demand variables.
In our experiments, we set |I| = 8 and |J | = 12. The other parameters are uniformly sampled
within the following ranges: fi ∈[80, 300], bi ∈[5, 40], cij ∈[1, 80], pj ∈[30, 120], rj ∈[5, 60],
Ci ∈[40, 120], and Mi ∈[10, 80].
B
Additional Numerical Results
(a) Total Reward
(b) Total Reward (Close-up)
(c) Elapsed Time (Close-up)
Figure 6: Evaluation results under different numbers of cuts added per iteration K.