Process Matters more than Output for
Distinguishing Humans from Machines
Milena Rmus
Roundtable Technologies Inc.
milena@roundtable.ai
Mathew D. Hardy
Roundtable Technologies Inc.
matt@roundtable.ai
Thomas L. Griffiths
Princeton University
tomg@princeton.edu
Mayank Agrawal
Roundtable Technologies Inc.
mayank@roundtable.ai
Abstract
Reliable human-machine discrimination is becoming increasingly important as
Large Language Models and autonomous agents are deployed in online settings.
Existing approaches largely evaluate whether a system can produce behavior or
responses indistinguishable from those of a human. This approach follows the
focus on the output of a machine as a criterion for determining whether it can think,
as suggested by Alan Turing. Cognitive science provides an alternative approach:
considering the process by which that behavior is produced. To evaluate whether
differences in cognitive mechanisms can be used to reliably distinguish humans
and machines, we introduce COGCAPTCHA30, a battery of 30 cognitive tasks
designed to provide diagnostic process-level features even when task performance
is matched. Across the battery, process-level features provide substantially stronger
discriminative signal than performance metrics alone, reliably distinguishing hu-
mans from agents even when task performance is matched (mean process-feature
classifier AUC = 0.88). To assess agentic process limitations, we conduct a con-
trolled red-teaming study comparing off-the-shelf frontier agents (Claude Sonnet
4.5, GPT-5, Gemini 2.5 Pro), Centaur (a large language model fine-tuned on 10.7M
human decisions), and two task-specific fine-tuning methods applied to Qwen2.5-
1.5B-Instruct: action-level supervised fine-tuning (A-SFT) and process-level
fine-tuning (P-SFT), which directly optimizes process features. We find that broad
fine-tuning on human choices makes task processes more human-like relative to
off-the-shelf frontier agents, and task-specific process-level fine-tuning further
improves human-like behavioral mimicry though this advantage diminishes with
cross-task transfer when process targets do not naturally generalize across tasks.
These results suggest that explicit process-level supervision can substantially im-
prove human behavioral mimicry, but only when appropriate task-specific process
representations are available. This highlights process specification as a central
bottleneck in achieving human-like cognitive processes in machines.
Introduction
Reliable human-machine discrimination is becoming increasingly important as large language models
and autonomous agents are deployed in online settings, creating new challenges for security, fraud
prevention, and platform integrity [Weidinger et al., 2022, Yao et al., 2024, Park et al., 2024]. Existing
approaches to distinguishing humans from machines are largely task performance-based, evaluating
whether a system can produce behavior or responses indistinguishable from those of a human. This
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.06524v1 [cs.AI] 7 May 2026

paradigm underlies systems such as CAPTCHA-style challenge-response tests and automated content
detectors, and reflects the enduring influence of the Turing Test, which answered "Can machines
think?" by testing whether machines could produce human-like output [Turing, 1950, Von Ahn et al.,
2003].
Modern AI systems increasingly satisfy this output-based bar. GPT-4.5 is judged human 73% of
the time in controlled Turing Tests [Jones and Bergen, 2025], frontier vision models can solve
reCAPTCHAv2 challenges [Plesner et al., 2024], and specialized AI systems now match or exceed
human experts in domains once considered canonical tests of intelligence, including chess and Go
[Silver et al., 2017, Campbell et al., 2002]. As AI systems approach human-level performance on
many output-based evaluations, output is an increasingly weak criterion for distinguishing humans
and machines.
However, even when humans and AI systems produce similar task outputs, the latent processes
generating those outputs may differ substantially. Artificial systems can arrive at the same answers
through strategies that diverge from those used by humans, including reliance on spurious shortcuts,
non-robust features, or memorized mappings [Geirhos et al., 2020, Lapuschkin et al., 2019, Block,
1981, Regan et al., 2014]. This motivates examining whether process-level behavioral features provide
discriminative information beyond task performance and outputs alone. Because such signatures
reflect latent constraints and strategies governing how decisions are generated rather than merely
whether a task is solved successfully, they may remain informative even when human and machine
outputs converge.
To leverage process traces for distinguishing humans and agents, we lean on insights and tools from
cognitive science, a field that has long used structured behavioral tasks to infer underlying cognitive
mechanisms from measurable regularities in behavior. Examples include working memory limitations
[Cowan, 2001, Collins and Frank, 2012], systematic trial-to-trial adaptation following errors [Rabbitt,
1966], and individual differences in sensitivity to wins and losses [Nowak and Sigmund, 1993]. These
patterns provide candidate process-level features that can distinguish humans from agents even when
task performance is matched.
However, identifying informative process-level signatures is only part of the challenge: for such
signals to serve as robust discriminators, they must remain difficult for agents to reproduce even
under targeted adaptation. Modern AI models are highly adaptable, and can be optimized through
fine-tuning or reinforcement learning toward target behavioral objectives, including alignment with
human preferences and response styles [Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022, Rafailov et al., 2023,
Binz et al., 2025]. This raises a deeper question: if process-level features distinguish humans from
agents, what information is required for an AI system to reproduce them? More specifically, when
does explicit process-level supervision provide advantages beyond large-scale action imitation? We
investigate this question in two stages:
First, how much additional discriminative value does process provide beyond output alone? To
evaluate this, we introduce COGCAPTCHA30, a battery of 30 cognitive tasks drawn from domains
with extensively operationalized process-level behavioral signatures. These tasks were selected to
leverage well-characterized differences in how humans solve problems-not merely whether they
solve them-thereby providing a rich testbed for comparing human and agent behavior. Across the
battery, we find that process-level behavioral features provide substantially greater discriminative
signal than performance metrics alone (e.g., accuracy, earned points), revealing systematic human-
agent differences even when task performance is similar.
Second, what limits an agent’s ability to reproduce human-like process? We compare frontier
agents (Claude Sonnet 4.5, GPT-5, Gemini 2.5 Pro), Centaur [Binz et al., 2025]-a 70B model
fine-tuned on 10.7M human decisions across 160+ tasks-and two task-specific fine-tuning methods
applied to the same Qwen2.5-1.5B base model: action-level supervised fine-tuning (A-SFT), which
imitates individual human actions, and process-level fine-tuning (P-SFT), which directly optimizes
task-level behavioral process features.
We find that broad behavioral fine-tuning substantially improves human-like process relative to
off-the-shelf frontier agents, with Centaur emerging as the strongest general-purpose human-behavior
benchmark. When task-specific process representations are known and aligned to the evaluation task,
P-SFT can further improve over both Centaur and A-SFT. However, this advantage diminishes under
cross-task transfer when process targets do not naturally generalize across tasks. These findings
suggest that explicit process-level supervision can improve human-like behavioral mimicry when
the relevant process representation is known, but that specifying transferable process representations
remains a central bottleneck for scalable human-process alignment.
Together, our results show that process equivalence is independent of output equivalence, and that
reproducing human-like behavioral process depends not only on optimization method but critically
on access to task-aligned process representations.
Output Equivalence vs. Process Equivalence
To study differences between human and agent task-solving behavior, we constructed COG-
CAPTCHA30, a task battery consisting of 29 cognitive tasks together with a canonical CAPTCHA
challenge (Figure 1). We begin by describing the shared human-agent evaluation setup, then use
CAPTCHA as an intuitive real-world example motivating the broader benchmark.
2.1
Participants and AI Agents
We administered COGCAPTCHA30 to 100 human participants recruited via Prolific (all participants
provided IRB-approved consent; 97 were retained after excluding runs affected by platform issues)
and collected 50 full-battery runs from each of three frontier vision-language agents (GPT-5, Gemini
2.5 Pro, and Claude Sonnet 4.5; 150 total agent runs). Agents interacted with the same browser-
based interfaces shown to human participants. On each trial, the agent received a screenshot and
returned a structured JSON action (e.g., target coordinates, tile index, or categorical choice), which a
Playwright-based execution layer translated into the corresponding DOM event (click, keypress, or
input). Example task instructions for both agents and participants are provided in Appendix A.3.
2.2
CAPTCHA as a Motivating Real-World Example
We begin with CAPTCHA, a real-world human-machine discrimination task. Modern AI systems can
solve many CAPTCHA variants at near-human accuracy [Plesner et al., 2024]. However, matching
CAPTCHA performance does not imply matching the behavioral process by which the challenge is
solved. To illustrate this, we compare humans and agents on two CAPTCHA variants: a Classic format
in which participants select target images from a grid, and a Cross-Tile format in which participants
identify all tiles containing a target object within a single image. Humans and agents achieve
statistically indistinguishable performance on these tasks (t(98) = −0.29, p = 0.77, Figure 1A),
indicating matched performance. However, their interaction patterns differ substantially: process-
level features such as click direction, side bias, and row/column exploration reliably distinguish
human from agent CAPTCHA behavior. Thus, output-matched agents need not be process-matched.
While CAPTCHA provides an intuitive real-world example of performance/process dissociation,
it captures only a narrow and domain-specific slice of human behavior. We therefore extend this
analysis to the remaining tasks in COGCAPTCHA30, which span a broad range of cognitive domains
and permit systematic measurement of process-level human-agent differences.
2.3
COGCAPTCHA30: a CAPTCHA-style Cognitive Task Battery
The remainder of COGCAPTCHA30 consists of 29 cognitive tasks spanning working memory,
decision-making, perception, planning and reasoning (Figure 1B; Table 3). Each task is paired with a
set of process features: run-level summaries such as exploration patterns, sensitivity to outcomes,
and trial-to-trial adaptation that capture how behavior unfolds across trials. These features go beyond
whether the final answer is correct or how many points are earned. For example, in the Iowa Gambling
Task (IGT), participants repeatedly choose among four card decks that differ in reward and risk
structure: two decks offer high immediate rewards paired with larger long-term losses, whereas two
offer smaller but safer returns [Bechara, 2001]. Task performance is measured by the total amount
of money earned, while process features characterize how that outcome was achieved, including
win-stay/lose-shift strategy, exploration rate, choice stickiness, etc. [Worthy et al., 2013]. Task
descriptions and feature definitions are provided in Appendix Table 3.
Two design principles guided the construction of COGCAPTCHA30. First, because human-agent
discrimination is often required in short-form verification settings such as CAPTCHA-like interactions,
Distance from Target (px)
Proportion of trials
with distance ≤ x
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00
200 300 400 500 600
Accuracy
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
90
Humans 
Agents
Angle sensitivity
1.00
0.98
0.84
0.63
0.82
0.88
0.89
0.99
0.92
0.88
0.85
0.99
0.73
0.71
0.99
0.83
0.54
0.80
0.87
0.69
0.44
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Visual Search
Change Detection
N-Back
CAPTCHA
Numerical Cognition
Delay Discounting
Digit Span
Corsi
Mental Rotation
Stroop
Visual WM
Mouse MDP
Seq. Prediction
Ultimatum Game
Info. Sampling
Posner
Task Switching
Temp. Reproduction
Fitts
WCST
Rhythm Tap
Slingshot Physics
Pursuit
Motion Tracking
Attentional Blink
Biological Motion
Navon
Line Bisection
Tower Physics
IGT
Visual Search
Change Detection
N-Back
CAPTCHA
Numerical Cognition
Delay Discounting
Digit Span
Corsi
Mental Rotation
Stroop
Visual WM
Mouse MDP
Seq. Prediction
Ultimatum Game
Info. Sampling
Posner
Task Switching
Temp. Reproduction
Fitts
WCST
Rhythm Tap
Slingshot Physics
Pursuit
Motion Tracking
Attentional Blink
Biological Motion
Navon
Line Bisection
Tower Physics
IGT
|Cohen’s d |d|
Unmatched
Performance-matched
1
3
5
7
Process AUC (CV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Iowa Gambling Task
high risk/
high reward 
low risk/ 
low reward
A
B
C
D
(x,y)
Visual WM
Goal
state
+2
-4
MDP 
Decision Making
Memory
Perception
Planning & Reasoning
Mental Rotation
Same or mirror?
Task Performance
Task Process
CAPTCHA
Task Performance
F1
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Humans
Claude, GPT, Gemini
Humans
Claude, GPT, Gemini
Click rate
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Sequential score
Direction change
Overselection
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
Humans
Claude, GPT, Gemini
Claude, GPT, Gemini
Claude, GPT, Gemini
Humans
Humans
Task Process
Cognitive Process Tracing
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
100%
94%
94%
0%
0%
0%
0%
1%
1%
0%
0%
23%
65%
98%
98%
98%
98%
11%
0%
...
A)
B)
C)
D)
Task Performance
Task Process
5200
4800
4400
4000
Humans
Agents
Total $ earned
Win/Stay
Lose/Shift
Humans
Agents
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Rate
...
Humans
Agents
Total score
8
4
0
-2
-4
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Accuracy
Humans
Agents
Human ns = 4
Human ns = 10
Agents ns = 10
Agents ns = 4
Distance from Target (px)
0.00
200 300 400 500 600
Proportion of trials
with distance ≤ x
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Humans
Agents
Strategy
Capacity limitation
Planning trajectory
Human
Agents
Figure 1:
Process-level behavioral features provide stronger human-agent discriminative
signal than task performance alone. A) CAPTCHA provides a motivating real-world example of
output-process dissociation. Humans and frontier agents (Claude Sonnet 4.5, GPT-5, Gemini 2.5
Pro) achieve comparable CAPTCHA performance, yet differ significantly in process-level interaction
features including sequential click patterns, direction changes, and overselection behavior. B)
COGCAPTCHA30 consists of 29 cognitive tasks (in addition to an image CAPTCHA) spanning
decision making, memory, perception, and planning/reasoning, each paired with task-specific process
features designed to capture how behavior unfolds over time. Representative examples illustrate
matched task performance despite divergent process-level signatures across multiple domains. Error
bars represent standard errors, individual dots represent individual human or agent participants.
C) Per-task output distance between humans and agents measured by absolute Cohen’s d on each
task’s primary performance metric (e.g., accuracy, score, reward). Tasks above the red threshold
are considered performance-matched. Many tasks show near-human agent performance. D) Per-
task cross-validated AUC of a Random Forest classifier trained to distinguish humans from agents
using process-level features. Despite good performance matching, process-level features remain
highly discriminative across most tasks, indicating that output equivalence does not imply process
equivalence.
we designed each task to satisfy two comparable practical constraints: (1) at most 10 trials and (2)
completion times under one minute. These constraints depart substantially from standard cognitive
paradigms, which often require hundreds of trials. Furthermore, all tasks were fully generative:
stimuli and conditions were procedurally generated on each task administration, preventing hard-
coded strategies that exploit fixed task structure.
All human and agent runs were transformed into a common feature vector comprising a single primary
performance output metric (e.g., accuracy, total score), and 129 task-specific process features. These
process features were collected over the 30 tasks and extracted using task-specific featurizers that we
applied uniformly to humans and agents (Appendix Table 3). Examples of processes and features are
shown in Figure 1B.
On output metrics, agents achieved statistical parity with humans on 13 of 30 tasks (Mann-Whitney
U, p ≥0.05; median Cohen’s |d| = 0.08 on matched tasks vs. 1.29 on unmatched tasks; Figure 1C),
defining a subset of tasks where output-based discrimination would fail.
Notably, many of the tasks on which agents underperformed humans involved continuous visual
stimuli (e.g., biological motion where continuous human figure movement implies direction, and
other video-based paradigms). This likely reflects a limitation of current vision-language agents,
which typically operate over discrete screen snapshots instead of continuous visual streams, rather
than a fundamental inability to perform such tasks. As multimodal systems gain stronger support for
continuous visual input, performance gaps on these tasks will likely diminish.
While agents achieved output parity with humans on 13 tasks, process-level features reliably dis-
tinguished humans from agents regardless of whether their final outputs were matched. A per-task
Random Forest classifier trained to distinguish humans from agents using process features (5-fold
stratified cross-validation per task; 200 trees; max depth 5; class-balanced) achieved a mean AUC
of 0.88 across output-matched tasks (Figure 1D), comparable to the mean AUC of 0.87 on output-
unmatched tasks (n = 17). Repeating the same Random Forest analysis using output metrics alone
yielded substantially lower discriminative performance (mean AUC = 0.55 on output-matched tasks,
mean AUC = 0.80 on output-unmatched tasks, and mean AUC = 0.77 across all tasks). Together,
these results indicate that process-level behavioral features provide substantially stronger discrimi-
native signal than output metrics alone, and remain informative even when human and agent task
performance converges.
Agentic Process Limitations
The preceding results establish that process-level behavioral features reliably distinguish humans
from current AI agents even when task performance is matched. A natural next question is what
limits an agent’s ability to reproduce human-like process. In particular, is the observed process gap
primarily due to insufficient exposure to human behavioral data, or does closing it require more direct
and task-specific forms of supervision?
To investigate this, we compare two increasingly targeted forms of behavioral adaptation. First,
we evaluate Centaur, a foundation model trained on large-scale human choice data across diverse
cognitive tasks, as a benchmark for broad human-behavior imitation. Second, we study task-specific
fine-tuning interventions that provide progressively more direct supervision over the target task,
ranging from action-level imitation to explicit process-level alignment.
3.1
Centaur: Large-Scale Human Choice Imitation
Off-the-shelf language models are not explicitly optimized to reproduce human behavior in structured
cognitive tasks. By contrast, Centaur [Binz et al., 2025] is a foundation model trained via supervised
fine-tuning to predict human decisions using over 10 million choices from more than 160 cognitive
experiments. Because Centaur often outperforms domain-specific cognitive models designed to
capture human behavior, it provides a strong benchmark for evaluating how closely broad human-
choice imitation can approximate human-like process.
Because Centaur operates on text-based prompts rather than visual inputs and requires a structured
trial format, we selected three COGCAPTCHA30 tasks that can be readily converted to text-only form:
the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST), and Information Sampling
Task. We evaluated Centaur and frontier agents on these tasks using two complementary metrics:
Distributional distance. For each model and task, we computed Cohen’s d between model and
human feature distributions for each process feature, and report mean |d| across features together with
energy distance between joint distributions [Székely and Rizzo, 2013]; energy results are reported in
Appendix Table 4. Lower values indicate closer alignment to human process patterns.
Classifier fool rate. We trained a Random Forest classifier using only features from the three
evaluation tasks (10 features total; 200 trees; max depth 5; class-balanced). The classifier was trained
to distinguish 97 humans from 120 frontier-agent runs (with 10 held-out runs per frontier model
reserved for evaluation), and then applied to held-out Centaur rollouts (n = 100). We report each
model’s fool rate: the fraction of runs assigned P(human) ≥0.5, along with the distribution of
classifier-assigned P(human) values.
Centaur more closely matched human process distributions than frontier agents across all evaluated
tasks, achieving substantially lower mean distributional distance (Centaur: 0.44; Gemini: 1.07;
GPT: 1.36; Claude: 1.65). Likewise, Centaur achieved substantially higher classifier fool rates than
all frontier agents (Centaur fool rate: 79%, remaining models ≤20%; Centaur p(Human): 0.67,
remaining models p(Human) ≤0.27).
These results establish Centaur as the strongest broad behavioral benchmark among the models
evaluated, showing that large-scale human action imitation improves human-like process relative to
off-the-shelf agents. However, the remaining gap between Centaur and human behavior leaves open
whether more direct task-specific supervision can further improve process-level alignment.
3.2
Task-Specific Adversarial Mimicry
Human-machine discrimination is inherently an adversarial problem. COGCAPTCHA30 demonstrates
that process-level behavioral features can distinguish humans from agents even when task outputs are
matched, and our comparison to Centaur shows that fine-tuning on large-scale human action data can
partially narrow this gap. However, these results do not imply that action imitation represents the
upper bound of human-like process mimicry. Any behavioral feature used to distinguish humans from
agents may itself become a target for optimization. Accordingly, a detector that succeeds against
off-the-shelf agents establishes only a behavioral gap under the current attacker model-not a durable
human-verification signal.
This motivates a stronger test: can an agent close the process gap when given increasingly direct
access to human behavioral supervision? Rather than asking whether current agents naturally exhibit
human-like process, we ask what form of supervision is required for an agent to reproduce it. We
test this through two fine-tuning interventions, evaluating at each stage whether (1) the resulting
process-feature distributions move closer to the human distribution, and (2) a process-based classifier
can still distinguish the modified agent from humans. We consider two forms of fine-tuning:
Task-specific action-level fine-tuning (A-SFT). We fine-tuned an open-source language model
(Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct) via LoRA [Hu et al., 2021] to predict the human action at each individual
decision point. This aligns the model to per-decision human action targets but imposes no explicit
objective over run-level behavioral patterns: small per-trial deviations can accumulate across a session,
yielding aggregate process features that diverge from the human population. This intervention tests
whether task-specific action imitation alone is sufficient to reproduce human-like process absent any
explicit optimization over aggregate behavioral features.
Process-level fine-tuning (P-SFT). The same model was fine-tuned with an additional loss that
explicitly aligned its run-level feature distribution to the human population’s.
In P-SFT, we added a second loss term that directly targeted the run-level process feature distribution.
At each training step, in addition to the standard cross-entropy loss on individual human actions,
we ran the model forward through a complete simulated run of the task and computed its expected
process feature vector under its own current policy. The full training objective was:
L = LCE + λdiff
X
k
wk
f model
k
−µhuman
k
σhuman
k
2
,
(1)
where LCE is the standard SFT cross-entropy on human action choices, f model
k
is the differentiable
estimate of run process feature k under the current policy, (µhuman
k
, σhuman
k
) are the human-population
mean and standard deviation of process feature k, and wk allows up-weighting features that converge
more slowly. λ controlled the relative weight of the feature-matching term against the action-level
cross-entropy (with λ = 1 meaning equal contribution; hyperparameters are given in Appendix A.2).
P-SFT illustrative example: Iowa Gambling Task.
To make the P-SFT mechanism concrete,
we illustrate it using the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), in which participants choose among four card
decks (A-D) over 10 trials. Although we use IGT for exposition here, the same procedure was also
applied to the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST) and Information Sampling Task in our broader
fine-tuning experiments. The targeted process features are learning slope, stickiness, deck entropy,
win-stay rate, lose-shift rate, and good-deck rate. On each trial, the model produces a probability
distribution over the four decks - p(A) = 0.15, p(B) = 0.10, p(C) = 0.30, p(D) = 0.45. These
probabilities feed directly into the feature estimates without waiting to see which deck the model
actually picks. For instance, if the model selected deck C on the previous trial, its stickiness estimate
for the current trial is simply p(C) = 0.45 - the probability of repeating the previous choice. Its
Table 1: Distributional distance to humans measured by mean absolute Cohen’s d across process
features (lower is more human-like). Centaur more closely matched human process distributions than
frontier agents across all evaluated tasks.
Method
Sampling
IGT
WCST
Average
Base Qwen (1.5B)
0.89
0.81
0.88
0.86
Claude Sonnet
1.15
3.32
0.48
1.65
GPT-5
0.27
1.91
1.91
1.36
Gemini 2.5 Pro
1.26
0.56
1.38
1.07
Centaur (70B)
0.15
0.42
0.76
0.44
good-deck-rate estimate is p(C) + p(D) = 0.75, since decks C and D are the less risky decks. At the
end of the run, per-trial estimates are averaged into run-level features (e.g., mean stickiness across
all trials). To construct the prompt for the next trial, one deck is sampled from this distribution
and the corresponding outcome is appended to the context (e.g., "You chose deck C and won 50.
Balance: 5050."). This sampled action shapes the subsequent prompt but is not differentiated
through-gradients flow only through the probability-based feature estimates described above. The
mismatch between the resulting run-level features and human means is then penalized via Equation 1.
We fine-tuned both methods using the same 10 process features employed in the Centaur evaluation
above. To test whether process-level supervision generalizes beyond the specific behavioral represen-
tations used during optimization, we withheld 8 additional process features from the optimization
objective and reserved them for evaluation only. These held-out features span distinct behavioral di-
mensions not directly optimized during training, allowing us to assess whether improvements transfer
beyond the supervised process representation. Additionally, we performed a cross-task evaluation
in which models were assessed on process features from tasks outside the supervised fine-tuning
task. We report held-out-feature and cross-task results separately in the following section. Fine-tuned
models were evaluated using the same metrics applied to Centaur and frontier agents: distributional
distance and classifier fool rate. In addition, we included the base Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct model as a
baseline to verify that any observed improvements were not attributable solely to architecture, model
family, or parameter scale.
3.3
Results
Distributional distance. Off-the-shelf LLMs remained substantially separated from humans in
process-feature space across all evaluated tasks (Table 1). Notably, larger frontier models were not
consistently more human-like: Claude Sonnet 4.5 and GPT-5 were among the most distant, while
the smallest off-the-shelf model evaluated (base Qwen 1.5B) was the closest on average (Table 1),
suggesting that greater capability does not necessarily imply more human-like behavioral process.
When evaluated on the same process features explicitly optimized during training (observed features),
process-level fine-tuning (P-SFT) achieved the closest match to human behavior, outperforming both
task-specific action imitation (A-SFT) and Centaur. This indicates that if the relevant task-level
behavioral representation is known and aligned to the evaluation target, explicit process supervision
can produce more human-like behavior than large-scale action imitation alone. To assess whether
these gains generalize beyond the supervised process representation, we next evaluated on held-out
process features from the same tasks that were excluded from optimization (Figure 2A). Under this
setting, P-SFT retained a substantial advantage over A-SFT and remained more human-like than
Centaur, though the gap narrowed relative to the observed-feature evaluation (Figure 2A).
However, this advantage diminished markedly under cross-task evaluation, where models were
assessed on tasks whose process representations differed from those used during supervision. In this
setting, P-SFT no longer outperformed A-SFT and fell below Centaur, indicating that improvements
from explicit process supervision transfer poorly when the target process representation is misaligned
with the supervised feature space.
Together, these results suggest that explicit process-level supervision can strongly improve human-like
behavioral mimicry when the relevant process representation is known and task-aligned, but that its
benefits do not extend for tasks with non-overlapping feature spaces.
Random Forest Model
=
(
Training Data:
Task Process Features
Random Forest Model
Heldout Data
P(human)
P-SFT
Centaur
A-SFT
Humans
Claude
GPT
Qwen
Gemini
ŷ
argmax P y | X )
Vote fraction (agent)
Vote fraction (human)
Human vs Agent
Centaur
A-SFT
P-SFT
Mean Cohen’s d 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
Observed 
features 
(in-task)
Left-out 
features
(in-task)
Cross-task
0.62
0.66
0.63
0.06
0.32
0.73
Less Human
More Human
A-SFT
P-SFT
Centaur (0.44)
Observed 
features 
(in-task)
Left-out 
features
(in-task)
Cross-task
P(human) from the RF classifier
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
1.0
0.8
0.0
40
100
Fool rate (% sessions with P(human) ≥ 0.5)
Observed 
features 
(in-task)
Left-out 
features
(in-task)
Cross-task
98%
84%
49%
57%
41%
40%
A)
B)
C)
D)
Figure 2:
Task-aligned process supervision improves human-like behavior in-task, but its
advantage diminishes under transfer. A) Mean absolute Cohen’s d between model and human
process-feature distributions for action-level fine-tuning (A-SFT), process-level fine-tuning (P-SFT),
and Centaur (dashed reference line). P-SFT achieves the closest match to humans when evaluated on
the process features explicitly optimized during training (observed features) and remains superior on
held-out features from the same tasks, but this advantage disappears under cross-task evaluation on
tasks with distinct process representations. B) Evaluation protocol for classifier-based behavioral
indistinguishability. A Random Forest classifier is trained to distinguish humans from off-the-shelf
agents using task process features, then applied to held-out rollouts from Centaur, A-SFT, and P-SFT
to estimate P(human). C) Classifier fool rate (percentage of sessions with P(human) ≥0.5).
P-SFT substantially outperforms A-SFT in the observed-feature and held-out-feature settings, but this
advantage declines sharply in the cross-task setting. D) Distribution of classifier-assigned P(human)
values across evaluation settings. Process-level supervision yields the most human-like behavior
when the target process representation is aligned with the evaluation task, but provides limited benefit
when transferring to tasks outside the supervised process space.
Classifier fool rate. Results from the held-out Random Forest classifier mirrored the distributional-
distance analysis (Table 2; Figure 2C-D). Off-the-shelf frontier agents were reliably detected, with
fool rates near zero. Task-specific action imitation (A-SFT) increased fool rate, indicating that
matching individual human actions moves models toward the human region of feature space.
When evaluated on observed process features, P-SFT achieved the highest fool rate of all methods,
outperforming both A-SFT and Centaur and approaching behavioral indistinguishability from humans
under the held-out classifier. This advantage persisted, though attenuated, when evaluation was
restricted to held-out features that weren’t used for P-SFT optimization from the same tasks. However,
under cross-task evaluation, P-SFT’s fool rate dropped sharply and approached that of A-SFT,
indicating limited transfer of process-level supervision beyond the behavioral feature space directly
optimized during training.
These findings are in line with distributional distance, and support the conclusion that process-level
supervision yields its largest gains when the target process representation is accessible, but does not
easily scale to tasks with different process features.
Table 2: Combined classifier fool rate. A Random Forest classifier (AUC = 0.970 ± 0.024) was
trained to distinguish humans from four off-the-shelf LLM agents using process features concatenated
across all three tasks. Test set off-the-shelf agents, fine-tuned models and Centaur were held out
from training and evaluated against the fitted classifier. Higher fool rate indicates more human-like
behavior.
Method
Fool rate ↑
Mean P(human)
In classifier training
GPT-5
4.0%
0.11
Gemini 2.5 Pro
0.0%
0.15
Claude Sonnet
0.0%
0.02
Base Qwen (1.5B)
20.0%
0.27
Centaur (70B)
79.0%
0.67
Discussion
Across COGCAPTCHA30, process-level behavioral features provided substantially stronger discrimi-
native signal than output metrics alone, reliably distinguishing humans from agents even when task
performance was matched. On a subset of structured decision-making tasks, we further compared
three increasingly direct forms of behavioral supervision. Task-specific action imitation (A-SFT)
reduced the process gap but did not eliminate it, consistent with the interpretation that matching
local action choices does not guarantee matching aggregate behavioral dynamics when small per-trial
deviations compound across a session. Centaur provided the strongest general-purpose benchmark for
human-like process, yet still failed to fully close the gap. Explicit process-level supervision (P-SFT)
produced the closest match to human behavior when the relevant task-specific process representation
was available, but its advantage disappeared when evaluated outside the supervised process space.
These findings suggest that broader human-process alignment may require methods capable of
learning more transferable or abstract behavioral representations than task-specific feature matching
alone. One possibility is that scalable process alignment will require richer forms of supervision,
such as latent behavioral embeddings, hierarchical behavioral abstractions, or multi-task objectives
that capture shared structure across tasks.
Our experiments suggest that achieving robust human-like process alignment is challenging even
under favorable task-specific supervision. Moreover, even if future methods substantially improve
process mimicry, robust process-level discrimination need not rely on a fixed battery of behavioral
probes. Automated task generation or iterative task redesign could continuously introduce novel
behavioral demands and target process dimensions where alignment remains imperfect, creating a
dynamic red-teaming loop in which adversaries must repeatedly adapt to newly introduced process-
level challenges.
Limitations.
Several limitations remain. First, our evaluation is restricted to a 1.5B-parameter
model and a limited subset of structured sequential decision-making tasks with discrete, low-
cardinality action spaces. Accordingly, it remains unclear whether similar process-alignment dynam-
ics will hold for larger models or richer interactive environments. In addition, our human data were
drawn from a relatively small participant sample from a single pool. We therefore operationalize
"human-like" process relative to the empirical behavioral distribution of this sampled population
under the chosen feature representation, rather than as a claim about any canonical form of human
cognition. We hope that these limitations can be addressed in future work.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
Funding information will be disclosed upon acceptance.
References
Laura Weidinger, Jonathan Uesato, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Po-Sen Huang, John Mellor,
Amelia Glaese, Myra Cheng, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Taxonomy of Risks posed by
Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, pages 214-229, 2022.
Yifan Yao, Jinhao Duan, Kaidi Xu, Yuanfang Cai, Zhibo Sun, and Yue Zhang. A survey on large
language model (LLM) security and privacy: The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly. High-Confidence
Computing, 4(2):100211, 2024.
Peter S Park, Simon Goldstein, Aidan O’Gara, Michael Chen, and Dan Hendrycks. AI deception: A
survey of examples, risks, and potential solutions. Patterns, 5(5), 2024.
Alan M. Turing. Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind, 59(236):433-460, 1950.
Luis Von Ahn, Manuel Blum, Nicholas J Hopper, and John Langford. CAPTCHA: Using hard AI
problems for security. In International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Crypto-
graphic Techniques, pages 294-311. Springer, 2003.
Cameron R Jones and Benjamin K Bergen. Large Language Models Pass the Turing Test. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.23674, 2025.
Andreas Plesner, Tobias Vontobel, and Roger Wattenhofer. Breaking reCAPTCHAv2. In 2024 IEEE
48th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), pages 1047-1056.
IEEE, 2024.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of Go
without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354-359, 2017.
Murray Campbell, A Joseph Hoane Jr, and Feng-hsiung Hsu. Deep Blue. Artificial Intelligence, 134
(1-2):57-83, 2002.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine
Intelligence, 2(11):665-673, 2020.
Sebastian Lapuschkin, Stephan Wäldchen, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Wojciech Samek,
and Klaus-Robert Müller. Unmasking Clever Hans predictors and assessing what machines really
learn. Nature Communications, 10(1):1096, 2019.
Ned Block. Psychologism and Behaviorism. The Philosophical Review, 90(1):5-43, 1981.
Kenneth Wingate Regan, Tamal Biswas, and Jason Zhou. Human and Computer Preferences at Chess.
In MPREF@AAAI, 2014.
Nelson Cowan. The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A reconsideration of mental storage
capacity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(1):87-114, 2001.
Anne GE Collins and Michael J Frank. How much of reinforcement learning is working memory,
not reinforcement learning? A behavioral, computational, and neurogenetic analysis. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 35(7):1024-1035, 2012.
Patrick M. A. Rabbitt. Errors and error correction in choice-response tasks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 71(2):264-272, 1966.
Martin Nowak and Karl Sigmund. A strategy of win-stay, lose-shift that outperforms tit-for-tat in the
Prisoner’s Dilemma game. Nature, 364(6432):56-58, 1993.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
27730-27744, 2022.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional AI:
Harmlessness from AI Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
Finn.
Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:53728-53741, 2023.
Marcel Binz, Elif Akata, Matthias Bethge, Franziska Brändle, Fred Callaway, Julian Coda-Forno,
Peter Dayan, Can Demircan, Maria K Eckstein, Noémi Éltet˝o, et al. A foundation model to predict
and capture human cognition. Nature, 644(8078):1002-1009, 2025.
Antoine Bechara. Neurobiology of decision-making: risk and reward. In Seminars in Clinical
Neuropsychiatry, volume 6, pages 205-216, 2001.
Darrell A Worthy, Bo Pang, and Kaileigh A Byrne. Decomposing the roles of perseveration and
expected value representation in models of the Iowa gambling task. Frontiers in Psychology, 4:
640, 2013.
Gábor J Székely and Maria L Rizzo. Energy statistics: A class of statistics based on distances.
Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 143(8):1249-1272, 2013.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Lu Wang, Weizhu Wang,
and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Kimron L Shapiro, Jane E Raymond, and Karen M Arnell. The attentional blink. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 1(8):291-296, 1997.
Nikolaus F Troje. Decomposing biological motion: A framework for analysis and synthesis of human
gait patterns. Journal of Vision, 2(5):2-2, 2002.
Steven J Luck and Edward K Vogel. The capacity of visual working memory for features and
conjunctions. Nature, 390(6657):279-281, 1997.
Philip Michael Corsi. Human Memory and the Medial Temporal Region of the Brain. 1972.
James E Mazur. An Adjusting Procedure for Studying Delayed Reinforcement. In The Effect of
Delay and of Intervening Events on Reinforcement Value, pages 55-73. Psychology Press, 2013.
David Wechsler. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 1955.
Paul M Fitts. The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of
movement. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47(6):381, 1954.
George Jewell and Mark E McCourt. Pseudoneglect: a review and meta-analysis of performance
factors in line bisection tasks. Neuropsychologia, 38(1):93-110, 2000.
Roger N Shepard and Jacqueline Metzler. Mental Rotation of Three-Dimensional Objects. Science,
171(3972):701-703, 1971.
Zenon W Pylyshyn and Ron W Storm. Tracking multiple independent targets: Evidence for a parallel
tracking mechanism. Spatial Vision, 3(3):179-197, 1988.
Frederick Callaway, Falk Lieder, Paul M Krueger, and Thomas L Griffiths. Mouselab-MDP: A new
paradigm for tracing how people plan. In The 3rd Multidisciplinary Conference on Reinforcement
Learning and Decision Making, Ann Arbor, MI, 2017.
David Navon. Forest before trees: The precedence of global features in visual perception. Cognitive
Psychology, 9(3):353-383, 1977.
Adrian M Owen, Kathryn M McMillan, Angela R Laird, and Ed Bullmore. N-back working memory
paradigm: A meta-analysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies. Human Brain Mapping,
25(1):46-59, 2005.
Samuel J Cheyette and Steven T Piantadosi. A unified account of numerosity perception. Nature
Human Behaviour, 4(12):1265-1272, 2020.
Michael I Posner. Orienting of attention: Then and now. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 69(10):1864-1875, 2016.
Stefan Künzell, Dominicus Sießmeir, and Harald Ewolds. Validation of the Continuous Tracking
Paradigm for Studying Implicit Motor Learning. Experimental Psychology, 2017.
Bruno H Repp. Sensorimotor synchronization: A review of the tapping literature. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 12(6):969-992, 2005.
Luke Clark, Trevor W Robbins, Karen D Ersche, and Barbara J Sahakian. Reflection Impulsivity in
Current and Former Substance Users. Biological Psychiatry, 60(5):515-522, 2006.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Simulation as an engine of physical
scene understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(45):18327-18332,
2013.
Julie M Bugg, Larry L Jacoby, and Jeffrey P Toth. Multiple levels of control in the Stroop task.
Memory & Cognition, 36(8):1484-1494, 2008.
Nicholas P Maxwell, Mark J Huff, and Jacob M Namias. Predictive alternating runs and random
task-switching sequences produce dissociative switch costs in the Consonant-Vowel/Odd-Even
task. Cognitive Processing, 26(1):157-170, 2025.
Mehrdad Jazayeri and Michael N Shadlen. Temporal context calibrates interval timing. Nature
Neuroscience, 13(8):1020-1026, 2010.
Martin A Nowak, Karen M Page, and Karl Sigmund. Fairness Versus Reason in the Ultimatum Game.
Science, 289(5485):1773-1775, 2000.
Miguel P Eckstein. Visual search: A retrospective. Journal of Vision, 11(5):14-14, 2011.
Jason Rajsic and Daryl E Wilson. Asymmetrical access to color and location in visual working
memory. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 76(7):1902-1913, 2014.
Stanislas Dehaene and Jean-Pierre Changeux. The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test: Theoretical Analysis
and Modeling in a Neuronal Network. Cerebral Cortex, 1(1):62-79, 1991.
Qwen Team. Qwen2.5 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115, 2024.
A
Appendix
A.1
COGCAPTCHA30 Catalog
Table 3: Full COGCAPTCHA30 process-feature catalog with task descriptions.
CAPTCHA image task is split into two rows for Classic and Cross-Tile variants.
Task
Task description
Task source
Task-specific features
Attentional blink
Rapid serial visual presentation;
detect two targets with varying
temporal lag
Shapiro et al. [1997]
blink_magnitude,
t2_short_lag_acc,
t2_long_lag_acc,
t2_given_t1_acc,
conditional_blink
Biological
mo-
tion
Point-light
walker
animation;
judge walking direction
Troje [2002]
direction_bias,
acc_left,
acc_right, acc_variability
Classic
CAPTCHA
Select all tiles matching a target
object
Von Ahn et al. [2003]
overselection_ratio,
sequential_score,
direction_change_rate
Task
Task Description
Task Source
Task-Specific Features
Cross-Tile
Objects span tile boundaries, re-
quiring spatial grouping
Von Ahn et al. [2003]
overselection_ratio,
sequential_score,
direction_change_rate
Change
detec-
tion
Detect changes between alternat-
ing images
Luck and Vogel [1997]
mean_flicker_cycles,
flicker_cv
Corsi
Spatial span task; reproduce se-
quence of block locations
Corsi [1972]
acc_slope_span,
transposition_rate,
intrusion_rate,
serial_first_acc,
serial_middle_acc,
serial_last_acc,
primacy_recency
Delay discount-
ing
Choose between smaller immedi-
ate vs larger delayed rewards
Mazur [2013]
discount_slope,
choice_consistency,
log_discount_k
Digit span
Verbal working memory; recall
digit sequences in order
Wechsler [1955]
acc_slope_span,
transposition_rate,
intrusion_rate,
serial_first_acc,
serial_middle_acc,
serial_last_acc,
primacy_recency
Fitts
Pointing task; click targets of
varying size and distance
Fitts [1954]
fitts_slope,
fitts_intercept,
click_precision_mean,
click_precision_std,
click_distance_px_mean,
click_distance_px_std
Iowa Gambling
Task
Sequential card choices from
decks with different reward-risk
profiles
Bechara [2001]
early_exploration,
learning_slope,
win_stay,
lose_shift,
stickiness,
deck_entropy
Line bisection
Mark midpoint of a line (spatial
bias)
Jewell
and
McCourt
[2000]
mean_abs_error,
error_slope_length
Mental rotation
Judge whether rotated shapes are
same or mirrored
Shepard
and
Metzler
[1971]
rotation_slope,
angle_acc_delta,
acc_angle_small,
acc_angle_large,
mirror_acc_effect
MOT
Track moving targets among dis-
tractors
Pylyshyn
and
Storm
[1988]
load_slope
Mouselab MDP
Explore states via mouse move-
ments to maximize reward
Callaway et al. [2017]
edge_fraction,
mean_dist_to_edge,
turn_rate,
edge_hovers_mean,
state_hovers_mean,
unique_edges_explored,
exploration_ratio,
pre_move_hovers
Navon
Global-local letters; identify large
vs small letter under congruency
manipulations
Navon [1977]
navon_congruency_effect,
global_advantage,
navon_global_cong_acc,
navon_global_incong_acc,
navon_local_cong_acc,
navon_local_incong_acc,
navon_global_congruency_acc,
navon_local_congruency_acc,
global_acc_advantage
N-back
Working memory task; detect re-
peats from N trials back
Owen et al. [2005]
criterion,
hit_rate,
fa_rate
Task
Task Description
Task Source
Task-Specific Features
Numerosity
Estimate which of two sets has
more items
Cheyette and Piantadosi
[2020]
difficulty_effect,
response_bias,
distance_acc_slope
Posner
Cueing task; respond to targets
with valid/invalid spatial cues
Posner [2016]
validity_acc_effect,
valid_acc, invalid_acc
Target pursuit
Track moving target with cursor;
continuous control task
Künzell et al. [2017]
cursor_smoothness,
directional_accuracy,
correction_rate,
anticipation_lag_ms
Rhythm tapping
Tap in time with rhythm; mea-
sures timing variability and drift
Repp [2005]
tap_error_mean,
tap_error_std,
tap_drift,
interval_cv
Sampling
Sequential information sampling
before making a decision
Clark et al. [2006]
mean_total_samples,
var_total_samples,
mean_sample_bias,
samples_easy,
samples_medium,
samples_hard,
neutral_first_rate,
effort_accuracy_corr
Sequence predic-
tion
Predict next element in a se-
quence with varying complexity
[N/A] source
difficulty_slope,
seq_acc_d1,
seq_acc_d2,
seq_acc_d3,
seq_acc_d4,
seq_acc_d5
Slingshot
Aim and launch projectile to
hit targets; physics-based control
task
Battaglia et al. [2013]
mean_aim_time, aim_time_cv,
distance_calibration_r,
mean_angle_delta_45,
angle_variability,
undershoot_rate,
overshoot_rate
Stroop
Name ink color of words; congru-
ent vs incongruent trials
Bugg et al. [2008]
post_error_slowing,
congruency_acc_effect,
cong_acc, incong_acc
Task switching
Alternate between task rules; mea-
sures switching cost
Maxwell et al. [2025]
switch_cost_acc,
repeat_acc, switch_acc
Temporal repro-
duction
Reproduce time intervals; mea-
sures temporal bias and variabil-
ity
Jazayeri and Shadlen
[2010]
temporal_bias, mean_ratio,
regression_to_mean
Tower physics
Predict stability of stacked objects
(intuitive physics)
Battaglia et al. [2013]
complexity_slope
Ultimatum game
Fairness decision-making
Nowak et al. [2000]
responder_accept_rate,
reject_unfair_rate
Visual search
Find target among distractors
Eckstein [2011]
search_slope,
search_click_precision,
click_dist_setsize_slope
Visual Working
Memory
Recall location/color under vary-
ing set sizes
Rajsic
and
Wilson
[2014]
error_slope_setsize,
bias_x_mean,
bias_y_mean,
bias_radius_mean,
bias_anisotropy,
large_error_frac,
swap_error_rate
WCST
Infer and update sorting rule from
feedback
Dehaene and Changeux
[1991]
learning_slope,
post_error_slowing,
shift_error_rate,
perseveration_cost,
rule_acc_variability
Table 4: Energy distance-a multivariate distributional metric defined as 2 E∥X −Y ∥−E∥X −
X′∥−E∥Y −Y ′∥, computed on per-feature human-standardized features-captures both location
and shape differences between a method’s and humans’ joint feature distributions; a value of zero
indicates identical distributions.
Method
Sampling
IGT
WCST
Average
Base Qwen (1.5B)
1.50
1.27
1.04
1.27
Claude Sonnet
1.33
11.14
0.61
4.36
GPT-5
0.29
5.84
2.28
2.81
Gemini 2.5 Pro
2.06
1.30
1.42
1.59
Centaur (70B)
0.03
0.52
0.56
0.37
A-SFT (observed features)
0.55
0.53
0.97
0.68
P-SFT (observed features)
0.11
0.06
0.06
0.07
Centaur (left-out features)
0.15
0.29
0.16
0.20
A-SFT (left-out features)
1.24
0.26
0.60
0.70
P-SFT (left-out features)
0.41
0.33
0.04
0.26
A-SFT (cross-task)
1.05
0.39
0.83
0.76
P-SFT (cross-task)
1.28
0.44
0.59
0.77
A.2
P-SFT: implementation details
All fine-tuning was performed on a single NVIDIA H200 SXM GPU (141 GB VRAM). We fine-tuned
Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct [Team, 2024] via LoRA [Hu et al., 2021] (rank 8, alpha 16, dropout 0.05)
applied to all attention and MLP projection layers. Training used AdamW with learning rate 10−5,
gradient clipping at norm 1, and gradient checkpointing to fit the per-rollout state expansion in
memory. A-SFT trained for 300 steps of cross-entropy on human actions. P-SFT added 30 steps of
cross-entropy warmup followed by up to 150 steps of joint optimization, with early stopping when
the feature-matching loss plateaued (patience of 20-50 steps depending on task). At each joint step,
we sampled a fresh stimulus sequence from a random training participant’s run, preventing the model
from overfitting to a single sequence of task stimuli.
Evaluation.
We use 2-fold cross-validation: 97 human participants are split into two folds (47 and
50). Each fold’s model is trained on one half and evaluated against held-out humans from the other
half. Per-fold rollouts (100 per fold, 200 total) are compared to per-fold held-out humans, and results
are pooled. This ensures no overlap between training and evaluation participants.
Information Sampling.
This task involves multiple decisions per trial: the agent chooses to reveal
a tile from option A, reveal a tile from option B, or stop and choose an option. The run-level features
are mean and variance of the per-trial total tile count. Because each trial involves a variable-length
sequence of decisions, we compute the expected tile count differentiably by expanding the set of
reachable game states at each within-trial step, weighted by the policy’s action probabilities. States
with identical observable histories (e.g., two A-tiles revealed via different orderings) are merged. The
expected stopping time is then
E[T] =
Tmax
X
t=0
t · P(stop at step t),
(2)
computed exactly by accumulating P(stop | statet)·P(statet) over the expansion. We cap the frontier
at 16 active states per step, which exceeds the theoretical maximum of 11 distinct observable states
after merging (since with 5 tiles per option, the merged state space at step t is the set of (nA,nB)
pairs with nA + nB = t. At trial boundaries, we select the most-likely outcome from the frontier
(greedy stop time and choice) to construct the prompt continuation for subsequent trials, matching
the prompt format used at evaluation time.
Iowa Gambling Task.
Each trial is a single 4-way choice over decks A, B, C, D; no within-trial
state expansion is needed. The six run features, all differentiable in the model’s action probabilities
pt, are:
• learning_slope: mean good-deck probability in the second half minus the first half,
⌊T/2⌋
P
t≥⌈T/2⌉pgood
t
−
⌈T/2⌉
P
t<⌈T/2⌉pgood
t
, where pgood
t
= pt(C) + pt(D)
• stickiness:
T −1
PT
t=2 pt(at−1), the mean probability assigned to the previous trial’s sam-
pled action (the sampled action at−1 is treated as fixed; gradients flow through pt only)
• deck_entropy: H(¯p) = −P
d ¯pd log ¯pd, where ¯p = 1
T
P
t pt is the mean action distribution
across trials
• win_stay: mean probability of repeating the previous action on trials following a positive
outcome,
|W|
P
t∈W pt(at−1), where W = {t : nett−1 > 0}
• lose_shift: mean probability of switching away from the previous action on trials following
a non-positive outcome,
|L|
P
t∈L(1 −pt(at−1)), where L = {t : nett−1 ≤0}
• good_deck_rate: 1
T
P
t(pt(C) + pt(D))
Win/loss classification at each trial is determined by the sampled action and the deterministic deck
outcomes, and is treated as fixed for gradient computation. Gradients flow only through the probability
vectors pt.
Wisconsin Card Sorting Task.
Each trial is a single 4-way choice (match to reference card 1, 2, 3,
or 4). Whether the choice is correct depends on the current hidden rule and the test card. The two run
features are:
• perseveration_cost: mean p(correct) on non-shift trials minus mean p(correct) on shift trials,
where p(correct) = pt(correct index) is the probability the model assigns to the correct card
on trial t
• learning_slope: mean p(correct) in the second half of the run minus the first half
Both are direct functions of the model’s per-trial softmax probabilities evaluated at the correct action
index, which is known from the stimulus sequence.
Training stability.
Under the closed-form feature estimator, the feature-matching loss decreases
monotonically during phase-2 training across all three tasks, typically reaching a plateau around
step 90-100. We use AdamW with learning rate 10−5, gradient clipping at norm 1, and gradient
checkpointing to fit the per-rollout computation in memory.
A.3
Task Instructions and Agent Prompts
A.3.1
Information Sampling
Agent Prompt (Sampling Phase)
There are two rows of tiles:
• Option A (top/blue): 5 tiles
• Option B (bottom/red): 5 tiles
Hidden tiles show "?". Revealed tiles show numbers (0-100). Your goal is to determine which
option has the higher average.
Decide whether to sample another tile or stop and choose.
If
sampling,
respond
with:
{"action":
"sample", "option":
"A", "tile":
<0-4>}
or
{"action":
"sample", "option":
"B", "tile":
<0-4>}
If ready to choose: {"action":
"choose"}
Agent Prompt (Choice Phase)
Based on the revealed tile values, which option has the higher average?
Respond with ONLY:
{"choice":
"A"} or {"choice":
"B"}
Participant Instructions
You will see two rows of 5 hidden tiles: Option A (top/blue) and Option B (bottom/red).
Each tile hides a number. One option tends to have higher values than the other.
Click a tile to reveal its value. Each flip costs points.
Choosing correctly earns bonus points.
When you are confident, click "I’m ready to choose."
Your goal is to determine which option has higher values overall while minimizing flip costs.
A.3.2
Visual Working Memory
Agent Prompt
Image 1 shows colored squares during encoding. Memorize each color’s position.
Image 2 shows an empty canvas and a target color labeled "Click where this color was."
Find where the target color was located and report its center coordinates.
Respond with ONLY:
{"x":
<number>, "y":
<number>}
Participant Instructions
You will see several colored squares flash on the screen.
After they disappear, one of the colors will appear as the target.
Click where on the screen that color was previously shown.
A.3.3
Visual Search
Agent Prompt
Find the RED CIRCLE and click on it.
It will be hidden among red squares and blue circles.
Respond with ONLY:
{"x":
<number>, "y":
<number>}
Participant Instructions
Find the RED CIRCLE and click on it.
It will be hidden among red squares and blue circles.
A.3.4
Multiple Object Tracking
Agent Prompt (Highlight Phase)
Some dots are highlighted as targets.
Report the coordinates of each highlighted target.
Respond with ONLY:
{"targets":
[{"x":
N, "y":
N}, ...]}
Agent Prompt (Tracking Phase)
Track the previously highlighted dots as they move.
Update each target’s position to the nearest dot.
Respond with ONLY:
{"targets":
[{"x":
N, "y":
N}, ...]}
Participant Instructions
Some dots will flash yellow-these are your targets.
All dots will then begin moving. Track the targets.
When the dots stop, click the dots you believe were the targets.
A.3.5
Delay Discounting
Agent Prompt
Look at the two monetary options on screen: A smaller amount now or A larger amount later
Determine the amounts and delay, reason about the tradeoff, and report your choice.
Respond as JSON:
{"now_amount":
N, "later_amount":
N, "delay":
"X", "choice":
"now"
or "later"}
Participant Instructions
On each trial you will choose between:
• A smaller amount now
• A larger amount later
There are no right or wrong answers-choose whichever you prefer.