Addressing Labelled Data Scarcity:
Taxonomy-Agnostic Annotation of PII Values in HTTP Traffic using LLMs
1st Thomas Cory
Technische Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany
cory@tu-berlin.de
2nd Axel K¨upper
Technische Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany
axel.kuepper@tu-berlin.de
Abstract-Automated privacy audits of web and mobile ap-
plications often analyse outbound HTTP traffic to detect
Personally Identifiable Information (PII) leakage. However,
existing learning-based detectors typically depend on scarce,
manually labelled traffic and are tightly coupled to fixed
label taxonomies, limiting transferability across domains and
evolving definitions of PII. This paper investigates whether
Large Language Models (LLMs) can support taxonomy-
agnostic annotation of explicitly transmitted PII values in
HTTP message bodies when the taxonomy is provided at run-
time. We introduce a multi-stage LLM-based pipeline that
combines deterministic pre-processing with label-level classi-
fication, targeted instance-level value annotation, and output
validation. To enable controlled evaluation and exemplar-
based prompting without relying on sensitive real-user cap-
tures, we further propose an LLM-based generator for
synthetic HTTP traffic with manually validated, taxonomy-
derived PII annotations. We evaluate the approach across
three taxonomies spanning different PII domains and granu-
larity levels. Results show that the pipeline accurately detects
PII types and extracts corresponding values for concrete
PII taxonomies. Overall, our findings position LLMs as a
promising foundation for flexible, taxonomy-agnostic traffic
annotation and for creating labelled data under evolving
privacy taxonomies.
1. Introduction
Privacy regulations, such as the GDPR [5] and
CCPA [23], introduce comprehensive legal frameworks
regulating the collection and processing of Personally
Identifiable Information (PII). However, assessing whether
the data and privacy practices of web and mobile appli-
cations are compliant with these regulatory frameworks
is challenging and often involves time-consuming manual
input. The last decade has seen repeated attempts to reduce
the manual overhead of such privacy audits through the
development of automated approaches. Automated analy-
sis of applications’ network traffic plays a key role in these
efforts, as network traffic represents the primary vector
for PII leakage, i.e. the transfer of PII out of the control
sphere of the data subject [17]. Early attempts employed
keyword-based heuristics to detect PII values in transmis-
sions, but were inherently limited due to the variability of
PII values. Later approaches employed machine-learning
techniques such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs) or
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT) [6] to detect PII values with greater flexibility.
However, these approaches still have a key drawback:
they require training on high-quality labelled data, which
traditionally requires careful manual effort to create. Fur-
thermore, they are locked to the label taxonomy and
type of data they were trained on, greatly limiting their
transferability, as even small changes to either generally
negatively impact their performance substantially. This is
particularly problematic for the task of PII detection, as
the definition of an exhaustive taxonomy of PII types is
challenging. Instead, existing taxonomies focus on specific
domains or granularity levels and are rarely fully compat-
ible with each other [25]. This challenge is reflected in the
PII detection and de-identification literature more broadly:
recent work reports little uniformity in how researchers
and corpus creators classify PII, with taxonomies differing
markedly in granularity and semantic scope, which in
turn affects both detection and labelling behaviour [24].
Furthermore, the task of manually labelling and curat-
ing ground-truth datasets is highly labour-intensive and
needs to be repeated for every update made to a label
taxonomy [4], [25]. The result is a widespread scarcity of
high-quality datasets of labelled network traffic with up-
to-date label taxonomies and limited flexibility of existing
PII detectors.
Generative models, particularly Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs), represent a paradigm shift in this regard:
rather than requiring careful training and attunement to
specific label taxonomies and input types, they are gener-
alists that can be prompted to perform a variety of tasks
without requiring retraining [28]. Prior work has demon-
strated their applicability for a wide range of language
processing and specifically Named Entity Recognition
(NER) and annotation tasks [4], [26], motivating us to
evaluate their suitability for taxonomy-agnostic annotation
of PII values in HTTP traffic.
In contrast to prior network-traffic PII detectors that
are either heuristic-driven or trained and evaluated on fixed
label sets, our work evaluates whether LLMs can mitigate
labelled-data scarcity in network-traffic privacy auditing
by enabling taxonomy-agnostic, value-level annotation of
PII in HTTP messages and by supporting controlled gener-
ation of labelled synthetic traffic. We address the following
research questions:
RQ1:
To what extent can an LLM-based pipeline accu-
rately identify and annotate explicitly transmitted
arXiv:2605.06305v1 [cs.AI] 7 May 2026

PII values in HTTP message payloads when the
label taxonomy is provided at runtime?
RQ2:
How do key architectural choices affect label-
level and instance-level annotation quality?
RQ3:
To what extent can synthetic HTTP messages
with ground-truth PII annotations support eval-
uation and exemplar-based prompting, and how
robust is performance across taxonomies that dif-
fer in domain focus and granularity?
In addressing these research questions, our contribu-
tions are threefold:
C1:
We present a multi-stage LLM-based approach
for the highly granular identification and annota-
tion of PII entities in HTTP message payloads,
capable of switching label taxonomies at runtime.
C2:
We complement the presented annotation ap-
proach with an LLM-based approach for the
generation of synthetic HTTP traffic with pre-
labelled PII values, reducing the need for labour-
intensive manual annotation and curation of
ground-truth datasets for shifting label tax-
onomies.
C3:
We evaluate the presented annotation approach
on three PII label taxonomies covering differ-
ent domains and granularity levels to assess the
performance, suitability, and flexibility of LLM-
based PII value annotation.
2. Related Work
A substantial body of prior work has studied pri-
vacy leakage by analysing outbound network traffic from
mobile applications. Early systems relied on rule- and
keyword-based heuristics to identify sensitive values such
as device identifiers or locations within HTTP requests,
often via VPN-based interception on unrooted devices [9],
[14], [21]. While effective for well-structured payloads
and known formats, such heuristics are brittle under
variable value representations, application-layer encoding,
and evolving schemas. Later systems therefore introduced
learning-based PII detectors. ReCon [17] interposes on
network traffic and uses machine learning to detect and
extract PII values across platforms and apps, while Pri-
vacyProxy [22] identifies likely PII through app-specific
signatures and crowd aggregation, reducing raw-traffic
exposure through hashed representations. Ren et al. [16]
further use ReCon longitudinally, showing that PII leakage
patterns change across app versions and that transport-
layer protection is adopted slowly. More recently, Kohli
et al. [8] compare tabular models over structured packet
features with document-classification models over raw
packet content, including transformer-based architectures
for mobile network packets. This line of work establishes
network traffic as a primary vantage point for privacy
auditing, but remains largely tied to the label schemes,
feature representations, and training data available at de-
velopment time.
LLMs have also been explored for structured and
unstructured information extraction, including NER and
privacy-related labelling. GPT-NER [26] reformulates
NER as a generation task with explicit boundary markers
and self-verification, achieving strong performance partic-
ularly in low-resource regimes. In privacy settings, Cory et
al. (2026) [4] present a modular LLM-based pipeline for
fine-grained, word-level annotation of GDPR transparency
requirements in privacy policies, combining passage-level
classification, retrieval-augmented generation, and self-
correction. Zeng et al. [29] similarly propose a staged
LLM-driven pipeline for annotating privacy phrases in
user-LLM interactions, showing that decomposition can
outperform direct prompting. Shen et al. [20] further high-
light the need for fine-grained and context-aware privacy
reasoning, as systems that detect PII may still struggle to
determine whether it is relevant to a given query. Meena
et al. [12] complement these approaches with a human-in-
the-loop framework for multilingual PII annotation, em-
phasising guidelines and quality assurance for fine-grained
and locale-specific labels. Together, these works moti-
vate LLM-based privacy annotation, while highlighting
the importance of task decomposition, schema adherence,
contextual disambiguation, and quality control.
Synthetic data generation has long been used to sup-
port modelling under privacy, access, and resource con-
straints. CTGAN [27] demonstrates high-fidelity genera-
tion for mixed-type tabular data, medGAN [2] synthesises
high-dimensional discrete patient records with promis-
ing downstream utility, and PATE-GAN [7] frames syn-
thetic data generation as a mechanism for modelling with
differential-privacy guarantees. However, studies compar-
ing synthetic and real data caution against treating syn-
thetic data as a direct substitute for real-world observa-
tions. Reiner Benaim et al. [15] compare synthetic and
real medical datasets across five observational studies and
show that utility depends on study design, sample size,
and data complexity, while Schmidhuber and Kruschwitz
[19] find that LLM-generated synthetic data can support
toxicity detection in some settings but not uniformly
across tasks and datasets. Synthetic data has also been
applied directly to privacy-sensitive information: Savkin
et al. [18] introduce SPY, an LLM-generated synthetic
benchmark for PII detection that emulates realistic PII-
containing scenarios without exposing real personal data,
and L¨obner et al. [10] use synthetic CV data for de-
identifying privacy-sensitive information in recruitment.
These works motivate our use of synthetic HTTP traffic
with ground-truth PII annotations to alleviate labelled-
data scarcity and enable controlled, taxonomy-specific
evaluation, while also underscoring the need to validate
synthetic results against real-world traffic.
3. Annotation Pipeline
We implement PII annotation in HTTP traffic as a
multi-stage pipeline that decomposes the overall task into
specialised sub-problems. This design follows the obser-
vation that jointly inferring what types of PII occur in a
message and where their corresponding values begin and
end is error-prone in network traffic, where short identi-
fiers, numeric values, and encoding artefacts are common.
We base our pipeline architecture on the multi-stage an-
notation approach presented by Cory et al. (2026) [4].
Figure 1 summarises our pipeline, which consists of (i)
deterministic pre-processing to normalise message bodies,

Labelled
Examples
Classifier
Annotator
Reviewer
Deterministic
Pre-Processing
POST
/v1/tags
{data}
HTTP
Message
Annotated
PII Values
Evaluation
LLM Component
RAG Data Source
Non-LLM Component
Pipeline data flow
RAG input
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed multi-stage annotation pipeline. The pipeline normalises HTTP message bodies, performs label-level classification
followed by targeted value annotation, and applies a review stage to refine and complete the resulting annotations.
(ii) a two-stage annotation procedure comprising label-
level classification and instance-level value annotation,
and (iii) a review layer that performs targeted correction
and completion.
3.1. Pre-processing
Prior to PII detection, HTTP message bodies are
normalised to mitigate encoding-related variability and
to present downstream stages with a consistent, human-
readable representation. We first apply URL decoding
(RFC 3986), using unquote_plus to resolve percent-
encoded sequences (e.g., %2B) and to map plus signs to
spaces where applicable. We then resolve HTML character
references, including named entities (e.g., &amp;) and
numeric references (e.g., &#x40;), by decoding them to
their corresponding Unicode characters.
In addition to these canonical transformations, HTTP
payloads may embed values that are encoded at the ap-
plication layer (e.g., Base64). To accommodate this, we
apply an optional decoding pass for common encodings
when there is strong evidence that a substring represents
an encoded payload. Concretely, we attempt Base64 de-
coding only for substrings that match a conservative syn-
tactic pattern and decode to predominantly printable UTF-
8 text; otherwise, the original representation is retained.
To avoid information loss and to ensure traceability, we
keep both the original body and its normalised (and, where
applicable, decoded) representation, and we map anno-
tated spans back to the original message when reporting
annotations.
3.2. Two-stage annotation
We perform annotation in two stages: label-level clas-
sification followed by instance-level value extraction. Let
m denote an HTTP message body and L the label taxon-
omy. The classifier predicts a set of labels Lm ⊆L that
are explicitly present in m. The extractor then focuses on
identifying the concrete value instances for the predicted
labels, yielding the final annotation set. We summarise
this decomposition as:
Annotate(m) = Extract(m, Classify(m)) .
(1)
This separation is motivated by the structure of HTTP
traffic. Many messages contain heterogeneous key-value
pairs and nested serialisations (e.g., JSON), where the
same surface form can correspond to multiple PII types
depending on context. By conditioning extraction on the
(typically small) set of predicted labels, the extraction
stage can allocate its capacity to boundary detection and
disambiguation rather than simultaneously exploring the
full taxonomy.
The classification stage operates under a strict explicit-
value requirement: a label is emitted only if at least one
corresponding value is present in the message body. In
particular, we avoid inferring PII from key names alone
(e.g., a field name such as email with an empty value),
and we do not attempt to guess or reconstruct values that
are not explicitly transmitted.
Given m and Lm, the extraction stage performs
targeted named-entity recognition over the normalised
body, producing a set of annotation objects of the form
(data_type, value), where data_type is a label
in L and value is the extracted string. Multiple instances
per label are permitted when distinct values occur within
the same message (e.g., multiple names in a registra-
tion form). Ambiguity is addressed through context-based
disambiguation using cues available in network traffic.
Key names provide strong priors (e.g., age, weight,
email), while value patterns (e.g., email address struc-
ture, international phone prefixes) and local formatting
(e.g., units such as kg or cm, locale-specific separators)
further constrain interpretation. Where payloads contain
nested structures, the structural position and neighbouring
fields provide additional semantic context that helps dis-
tinguish short identifiers and numeric values that would
otherwise be underspecified.
3.3. Post-annotation Review
Finally, we apply a review stage that implements a
targeted quality assurance mechanism analogous to ad-
judication in manual annotation workflows. Rather than
annotating a message independently, the reviewer is pre-
sented with the original message body and the initial
annotation set and is tasked with refining the annotations.
In practice, this stage primarily addresses three recurrent
error modes in network-traffic annotation: missed values
(false negatives), incorrect label assignments arising from
ambiguity, and boundary errors where extracted spans are
truncated or include surrounding delimiters. The reviewer
may therefore add missing annotations, correct labels
based on the message context and taxonomy definitions,
and adjust value boundaries. By explicitly conditioning

review on the prior output, this stage focuses effort on
correction and completion, with the goal of yielding more
consistent annotations without requiring a second full pass
from scratch.
4. LLM Inference Harness
Each
LLM-based
component
in
our
pipeline
is
wrapped by a shared harness that enriches the model
input with task-relevant context via retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG), and validates and normalises the model
output before it is passed to subsequent stages. This
harness, illustrated in Figure 2, addresses two recurrent
failure modes in LLM-driven extraction pipelines: limited
adherence to domain-specific label vocabularies and oc-
casional violations of the expected output structure.
4.1. Prompt preparation
We follow a structured prompt engineering method-
ology tailored to information extraction under domain-
specific taxonomies. First, we explicitly ground each
prompt in the target taxonomy and require verbatim la-
bel copying to reduce label paraphrasing and out-of-
vocabulary predictions. Where supported, we enforce a
fixed JSON schema through structured output interfaces
and reiterate exact string-matching requirements for label
names. Second, to improve span-level extraction fidelity,
we specify boundary rules that favour minimal spans (ex-
cluding syntactic delimiters such as quotes and separators)
and treat composite fields as sets of atomic values where
values are explicitly separated in the payload. Finally, we
provide guidance for ambiguity resolution in network traf-
fic, where short strings and numeric values are frequently
underspecified without context. In these cases, the prompts
instruct the model to rely on contextual cues such as
key names, units, and structural position, and to omit an
annotation when the available evidence does not support
a confident assignment under the taxonomy definitions.
Across tasks, we employ a consistent prompt struc-
ture that combines role priming with explicit non-goals
and lightweight self-checks. Role priming constrains the
expected behaviour (e.g., classifier vs. annotator), while
explicit non-goals prevent undesirable transformations
(e.g., normalising values or inferring missing information).
Short positive and negative examples are used selectively
to illustrate boundary cases and to demonstrate the precise
output format. Representative of all system prompts used
in our approach, the annotator’s system prompt is provided
in Appendix B.
To improve robustness across heterogeneous HTTP
payload structures and promote taxonomy compliance, we
augment each model call with a small set of retrieved ex-
amples. We combine two complementary retrieval signals.
The first targets structural similarity, retrieving examples
with comparable serialisation formats, key-value layouts,
or schema fragments. The second targets label coverage,
ensuring that the retrieved context includes at least one
demonstration for each label predicted to be present in
the input (where applicable).
For similarity-based retrieval, we maintain a curated
database of annotated examples E
= {(mi, Ai)}N
i=1,
RAG
Injector
LLM
Client
Deterministic
Validator
Vector DB
(Examples)
LLM
SBERT
Prompt
Templates
Label
Taxonomy
Structure
Templates
Language Model
LLM Component
RAG Data Source
Non-LLM Component
Pipeline data flow
RAG input
Reject & retry
Figure 2. Overview of the LLM harness used within each pipeline
component. The harness enriches inputs with retrieved, task-relevant
exemplars and applies task-specific output validation to ensure schema
and taxonomy compliance.
where mi denotes a message body and Ai its ground-
truth annotations. We index messages using sentence-
level embeddings and retrieve the top-k nearest neighbours
under cosine similarity. In practice, this yields examples
that share relevant structural features with the input (e.g.,
comparable JSON nesting or field naming conventions),
which in turn improves output formatting and boundary
selection. For label-aware retrieval, we select a subset of
examples that collectively cover the target label set. To
minimise the number of required examples, we implement
this as a greedy selection procedure over E, adding exam-
ples that maximise coverage of labels not yet observed
in the retrieved context. This mechanism is particularly
valuable when the input or taxonomy contains uncommon
PII types.
Empirically, this combined RAG strategy serves three
purposes. It anchors the model to the exact label vocab-
ulary and output structure expected by the downstream
validator, it enables lightweight domain adaptation by
swapping or extending the database of examples without
fine-tuning, and it mitigates cold-start effects for newly
introduced labels by allowing support to be added through
additional demonstrations.
4.2. Output validation and normalisation
To prevent error propagation, all LLM outputs are
processed by a task-specific validation layer prior to down-
stream consumption. The validator first checks structural
well-formedness (e.g., JSON parseability and schema con-
formance) and enforces taxonomy compliance by verify-
ing that all emitted labels occur in the target taxonomy
L. When invalid labels occur, we apply a conservative
normalisation step that maps common surface-form vari-
ations to valid taxonomy entries. Concretely, we embed
the invalid label string and select the nearest neighbour
among valid labels under cosine similarity:
correct(l) = arg max
l′∈L cos(ϕ(l), ϕ(l′)),
(2)

Scenario
Generator
Response
Generator
Scenario
Templates
HTTP
Requests
Label 1
Label 2
Label 3
Label
Taxonomy
Request
Generator
HTTP
Responses
Real-world
Examples
Real-world
Examples
Annotation
Pipeline
Manual validation
LLM Component
RAG Data Source
Non-LLM Component
Pipeline data flow
RAG input
Figure 3. Overview of the synthetic HTTP message generator. Starting from a label taxonomy, the pipeline generates scenario templates, instantiates
synthetic requests, and (optionally) synthesises corresponding responses. Each stage is followed by validation to enforce taxonomy adherence and to
ensure that generated messages contain explicit, annotated PII values.
where ϕ(·) denotes the embedding function used for label
strings. This mechanism resolves frequent benign devi-
ations such as differences in capitalisation, hyphenation,
minor paraphrases, or lightweight elaborations (e.g., "E-
mail" versus "Email", or "Date of Birth" versus "Date
of birth"). To preserve precision, the correction is applied
only when the similarity exceeds a predefined threshold;
otherwise, the label is rejected and the corresponding an-
notation is discarded or flagged for re-querying, depending
on the component. This design ensures that downstream
stages receive outputs that are both structurally valid and
consistent with L.
5. Synthetic HTTP Message Generator
In addition to our taxonomy-agnostic annotation
pipeline, we introduce a complementary mechanism for
producing labelled data at scale: a synthetic HTTP mes-
sage generator that creates realistic request-response traf-
fic containing explicit PII values together with ground-
truth annotations. Figure 3 summarises the pipeline. The
generator is designed to address a central bottleneck
in supervised PII detection for network traffic, namely
the limited availability of high-quality labelled datasets
and the sensitivity of real traffic to privacy and access
constraints. By producing synthetic traffic that follows
plausible application scenarios while avoiding the use of
real user data, the generator supports controlled train-
ing, ablation, and evaluation studies under labelled-data
scarcity.
The generator is taxonomy-driven and LLM-agnostic:
it consumes a label taxonomy (e.g., derived from platform
disclosures or domain-specific PII schemes) and inter-
faces with any OpenAI-compatible API, enabling use with
both hosted and locally deployed models. The pipeline
proceeds in three stages: scenario generation, message
generation, and validation. An optional third generation
stage synthesises HTTP responses conditioned on previ-
ously generated requests, yielding bidirectional request-
response traces suitable for end-to-end evaluation.
5.1. Scenario and message generation
The first stage constructs scenario templates that spec-
ify families of semantically related HTTP interactions.
Given a taxonomy L, the LLM produces a set of scenarios
that jointly aim to cover the taxonomy while remaining
consistent with common application flows (e.g., account
creation, session management, checkout, telemetry sub-
mission). Each scenario template includes a goal descrip-
tion, host and endpoint variants, plausible HTTP methods
and content types, and a distribution over candidate PII
types with typical placements (path, query, headers, body).
The candidate distribution is used to bias subsequent
instantiation towards scenarios that naturally elicit partic-
ular labels, thereby improving coverage without requiring
manual scenario design.
In the second stage, the LLM instantiates each vali-
dated scenario into a set of concrete HTTP requests. Each
generated request comprises a structured representation
of the HTTP message (method, path, headers, and body)
together with a list of PII annotations. An annotation
specifies the taxonomy label, the placement within the
request (path, query, header, or body), and the verbatim
value string. Importantly, generated values are required
to be explicitly present in the message; the generator
does not rely on implicit attributes or placeholders that
are absent from the payload. This mirrors the explicit-
value constraint adopted in the annotation pipeline and
ensures that the synthetic dataset is suitable for training
and evaluation of value-level PII detectors.
Where enabled, the generator subsequently produces a
corresponding HTTP response for each request. Response
synthesis is conditioned on the request content and sce-
nario context, resulting in responses that remain plausible
(e.g., status codes, response bodies, and headers consis-
tent with the preceding request) and that may contain
additional annotated PII values (e.g., account identifiers
returned upon registration). Responses are represented in
the same structured format as requests and are validated
under the same explicit-value requirement.
5.2. Validation and coverage tracking
The generator incorporates validation after each gen-
eration stage to prevent low-quality outputs from entering
the final dataset. For requests and responses, the validator
checks well-formedness of the HTTP structure, verifies
that all labels in the annotation list occur in L, and
enforces that each annotated value appears verbatim in the

specified message component. Outputs that violate these
constraints are rejected and may be regenerated depending
on the pipeline configuration.
In addition, the pipeline tracks label coverage through-
out generation. Concretely, it monitors which labels from
L appear across validated scenarios and across validated
messages, enabling users to quantify progress towards
comprehensive coverage and to identify underrepresented
types. In practice, perfect coverage is not always attainable
for arbitrary taxonomies, as some labels may be difficult
to embed realistically into common HTTP exchanges
without contrived scenarios. Coverage tracking therefore
serves as a diagnostic and control signal: it allows the gen-
eration process to be steered (e.g., by increasing the num-
ber of scenarios or requests per scenario, or by enriching
the scenario set) until the desired balance between realism,
diversity, and taxonomy representation is achieved.
6. Evaluation
This section empirically assesses the effectiveness
and flexibility of our LLM-based pipeline for taxonomy-
agnostic PII value annotation in HTTP traffic. We focus
on two questions: (i) how accurately the pipeline identifies
which PII types occur in a message and annotates their
corresponding values, and (ii) how performance changes
across pipeline configurations and across taxonomies that
differ in domain focus and granularity.
6.1. Methodology
We evaluate the proposed annotation pipeline using a
staged framework that supports component-level ablation
and reports performance at two complementary granular-
ities. First, a label-level evaluation measures whether a
pipeline configuration correctly identifies which PII types
occur in a message. Second, an instance-level evaluation
assesses whether the pipeline annotates the corresponding
values with correct boundaries. Unless stated otherwise,
we report precision, recall, and F1, computed from true
positives (TP), false positives (FP), and false negatives
(FN) under the respective matching criterion.
6.1.1. Label-level evaluation. For each HTTP message,
we derive the set of unique labels present in the ground
truth annotations, G, and the set predicted by the pipeline,
P. We then treat label detection as a multi-label presence
task: a label counts as a true positive if it appears in both
sets, as a false positive if it appears only in P, and as a
false negative if it appears only in G. This formulation in-
tentionally abstracts away from within-message frequency
and evaluates whether the pipeline detects the presence of
each PII type at least once in the message body.
6.1.2. Instance-level evaluation. Instance-level evalua-
tion considers annotated values. We represent each anno-
tated instance as a tuple (l, v) consisting of a label l and
its string value v. We report two complementary matching
regimes.
Under exact matching, a predicted instance is counted
as correct only if both the label and the value string match
the ground truth exactly. This strict criterion directly
captures boundary errors and normalisation artefacts, and
is therefore informative for downstream use cases that
require verbatim leakage identification.
To account for minor, non-semantic deviations in an-
notation (e.g., whitespace differences, encoding-related
character variants, or small boundary shifts), we addi-
tionally report a fuzzy matching score. Concretely, for
each ground-truth instance (l, vg), we consider predicted
instances with the same label and select the candidate
with the highest string similarity (computed using the
SequenceMatcher algorithm). A match is accepted
if the similarity exceeds a threshold τ. Following prior
work [4], we set τ = 0.8. To prevent double-counting,
we apply greedy one-to-one assignment: once a predicted
instance has been matched to a ground-truth instance, it
is removed from further consideration. FP and FN are
derived from the remaining unmatched predictions and
ground-truth instances, respectively.
6.1.3. Ablation protocol. We evaluate two configurations.
In the two-stage configuration, the classifier predicts the
set of labels present in a message, and the annotator is con-
strained to extract values only for these predicted labels;
the reviewer then refines the output. In the single-stage
configuration, the annotator receives only the raw message
body and performs joint detection and annotation; the
reviewer again refines the output. These configurations
isolate the effect of the explicit decomposition introduced
in Section 3.2.
To quantify the contribution of individual pipeline
components, we evaluate outputs at multiple points in
the pipeline. Specifically, we measure (i) label-level per-
formance after the classification stage, (ii) instance-level
performance after two-stage annotation, (iii) instance-level
performance under a single-stage configuration in which
the annotator receives only the raw message body and
performs joint detection and annotation, and (iv) instance-
level performance after the review stage. This design
allows us to determine whether errors arise from missed
type detection, from boundary selection during annotation,
or from insufficient correction during review.
6.2. Experimental setup
We evaluate on three datasets, each associated with a
distinct PII taxonomy that differs in domain focus and
granularity. This choice is deliberate: our objective is
to assess whether a single pipeline can be applied to
heterogeneous label schemes provided at runtime, without
retraining or taxonomy-specific engineering.
The first taxonomy, AI4Privacy, is derived from the
AI4Privacy pii-masking-200k [1] label set applied by
Manietti and Elia [11]. Comprising 53 classes, it reflects
a broad, natural-language-oriented PII scheme covering
common identifiers (e.g., names, email addresses, phone
numbers), financial attributes, government-issued identi-
fiers, health-related attributes, biometrics, and other sen-
sitive categories. The second taxonomy, mHealth, corre-
sponds to the Protected Health Information (PHI) scheme
for mHealth apps presented by Cory et al. (2024) [3]. This
taxonomy comprises 38 classes covering health-specific
entities (e.g., vital signs and fitness metrics) alongside
device identifiers and location-related attributes. The third
taxonomy, PlayStore, follows the Google Play Data Safety

TABLE 1. LABEL- AND INSTANCE-LEVEL F1 SCORES ACROSS PIPELINE CHECKPOINTS FOR EACH TAXONOMY.
AI4Privacy
mHealth
PlayStore
Step
F1label
F1fuzzy
F1exact
F1label
F1fuzzy
F1exact
F1label
F1fuzzy
F1exact
Classifier
0.9860
-
-
0.9858
-
-
0.9109
-
-
Annotator (single-stage)
0.9857
0.9720
0.9377
0.9843
0.9593
0.9549
0.9091
0.8633
0.8061
Annotator (two-stage)
0.9888
0.9776
0.9438
0.9880
0.9703
0.9658
0.9184
0.8625
0.8012
Reviewer (single-stage)
0.9855
0.9674
0.9319
0.9870
0.9599
0.9548
0.9053
0.8570
0.8017
Reviewer (two-stage)
0.9876
0.9747
0.9400
0.9881
0.9647
0.9597
0.9078
0.8554
0.7973
labels [13], which provide a higher-level categorisation of
data types disclosed by Android applications across 38
classes (e.g., personal information, financial data, health
and fitness, messages, media, app activity, browsing his-
tory, and device identifiers). The full label taxonomies are
provided in Appendix C.
6.2.1. Data preparation. For each taxonomy, we use the
synthetic HTTP message generator described in Section 5
to create a labelled corpus of HTTP requests. Although
the annotation pipeline can process both requests and
responses, we restrict the evaluation to requests because
the primary motivation underpinning our work is to assess
PII leakage in outbound transmissions. To ensure reliable
ground truth, we manually validate outputs throughout the
generation pipeline, including scenario definitions, gener-
ated requests, and associated annotations. In particular, we
check structural well-formedness, taxonomy compliance,
verbatim occurrence of annotated values, and the semantic
plausibility of label assignments.
To keep manual validation feasible while maintaining
broad taxonomy coverage, we limit generation to 100
HTTP requests per scenario. The number of scenarios
differs across taxonomies because the taxonomies vary in
size, granularity, and semantic scope. The resulting cor-
pora comprise 35 scenarios for AI4Privacy, 25 scenarios
for mHealth, and 29 scenarios for PlayStore.
For each taxonomy, we construct a stratified 80/20
split subject to two constraints: (i) both partitions pro-
vide full label coverage, such that each label appears at
least once in both partitions, and (ii) label distributions
are approximately preserved across partitions. The larger
partition serves as the evaluation set processed by the
annotation pipeline, while the smaller partition serves as
the example set for the RAG mechanism, supplying few-
shot demonstrations to the LLM components.1
6.2.2. Models and infrastructure. To reduce coupling
between generation and annotation, we employ different
LLMs for the two pipelines. Synthetic traffic is generated
using unsloth/GLM-5-GGUF:Q4_K_M. All annota-
tion stages (classification, annotation, and review) use
unsloth/Qwen3.5-397B-A17B-GGUF:Q4_K_M, a
Mixture-of-Experts model with 397B total parameters
and 17B active parameters per forward pass, served via
llama.cpp. Inference is executed on a dedicated GPU
server equipped with four NVIDIA H200 NVL GPUs.
1. We use this terminology to avoid confusion with conventional
train/test splits, as no statistical model parameters are trained in our
pipeline.
6.3. Results
As described in Section 6.1, we evaluate the pipeline
at five checkpoints corresponding to classification, single-
stage annotation, two-stage (targeted) annotation, and the
respective reviewed variants. Table 1 summarises the
F1 scores across all checkpoints and datasets (see Ap-
pendix A for precision and recall). Overall, performance
is strongest on AI4Privacy and mHealth, where label-
level detection is near-ceiling already at the classification
stage and instance-level extraction remains high across
both annotation configurations. In contrast, PlayStore is
consistently more challenging, indicating that this taxon-
omy provides a weaker upstream signal and that its value
formats and structures are harder to annotate reliably.
At the annotation stage, the two-stage configuration
matches or slightly outperforms single-stage annotation on
AI4Privacy and mHealth. The gains are most visible at the
instance level, suggesting that conditioning extraction on
predicted label sets primarily improves coverage of values
rather than changing type detection. On PlayStore, the
picture differs: two-stage annotation improves label-level
detection, but does not translate into a corresponding im-
provement in instance-level extraction, where single-stage
annotation remains marginally stronger. Taken together,
these results indicate that the benefit of architectural de-
composition depends on the reliability of the classifier and
on how readily value boundaries can be identified for a
given taxonomy.
Finally, the review stage does not yield consistent
improvements. Across datasets, reviewed outputs are com-
parable to, and in several cases slightly worse than,
the corresponding unreviewed annotation outputs. This
suggests that under the present operating regime, where
annotation quality is already high on two of the three
taxonomies, blanket review using the same underlying
model provides limited net benefit, and that its utility may
depend on selectively targeting messages that are difficult
or ambiguous.
6.4. Discussion
The results address our research questions while also
delimiting the scope of the evidence provided by our syn-
thetic evaluation. Regarding RQ1 and RQ3, the pipeline
demonstrates that LLM-based annotation can identify and
annotate explicitly transmitted PII values in HTTP mes-
sage bodies when the taxonomy is supplied at runtime.
The synthetic, ground-truth annotated HTTP messages
further provide a practical substrate for controlled eval-
uation and exemplar-based prompting. Performance on

AI4Privacy and mHealth indicates that the pipeline is
effective when taxonomy definitions align with typical
surface forms and contextual cues in HTTP payloads.
By contrast, the drop on PlayStore shows that robustness
is not uniform across taxonomies. We interpret this as
evidence that annotation difficulty depends strongly on
taxonomy design: broad, policy-facing categories are less
directly associated with distinctive value formats than
more concrete PII or PHI categories. Since all datasets
maintain full label coverage in both the evaluation set
and the RAG exemplar pool, these differences are unlikely
to stem solely from missing demonstrations; rather, they
point to challenges introduced by semantic granularity,
contextual dependence, and weak correspondence between
labels and observable payload values.
With respect to RQ2, the ablation study shows that
architectural decomposition matters, but its benefits de-
pend on upstream classification quality. The two-stage
approach yields small but consistent gains where classifi-
cation is reliable, primarily through higher instance-level
recall. However, the PlayStore results show that targeted
annotation can inherit noisy classifier outputs and trade
precision for recall. For broad or technically embedded
labels, future variants may benefit from stronger boundary
constraints, delimiter-aware post-processing, placement-
specific normalisation, or label-specific confidence checks.
The review stage, in contrast, provides limited net benefit:
across datasets, it corrects some errors but introduces
others. One likely reason is that the same model family
is used for annotation and review, which may reproduce
shared assumptions rather than provide an independent
correction signal. This motivates selective or heteroge-
neous review strategies, such as triggering review only
for low-confidence messages, using a different reviewer
model, or involving human adjudication for ambiguous
cases.
The use of synthetic HTTP traffic enables controlled
taxonomy coverage, avoids exposing real user traffic,
and provides ground-truth annotations at a scale that
would be costly to obtain manually. Manual validation
of scenarios, requests, and annotations mitigates obvious
structural and semantic errors, but it cannot establish
that the generated traffic follows the same distribution
as real-world application traffic. Real traffic may contain
malformed payloads, undocumented schemas, application-
specific encodings, compression, mixed-language values,
obfuscation, telemetry artefacts, or transformed identifiers
that are underrepresented in the synthetic corpora. The
reported scores should therefore be interpreted as evidence
of feasibility under controlled conditions, not as final
estimates of performance in deployed systems.
The present evaluation is further limited to explicitly
transmitted PII values in HTTP request bodies. While the
generator and annotation framework can in principle be
extended to paths, query parameters, headers, cookies,
and response bodies, this remains to be evaluated because
these components provide different contextual cues and
may require different normalisation and boundary rules.
Similarly, the approach targets text-based, recoverable
values and does not address encrypted traffic, binary pay-
loads, or PII that is only inferable from combinations of
non-PII attributes.
Finally, the absolute scores reflect a single model con-
figuration for generation and annotation. Their magnitude
may vary across model families, parameter scales, quan-
tisation levels, prompt variants, and exemplar-selection
strategies. LLM-based PII analysis also raises practical
deployment concerns, including latency, cost, energy use,
and the risk of exposing sensitive values to external
providers. We therefore view the pipeline primarily as a
flexible annotation and audit-support mechanism, rather
than as a direct replacement for lightweight production
detectors. We consider the most promising path for future
research and deployment to be a hybrid one: using LLM-
based annotation to create or refine labelled data under
evolving taxonomies, and subsequently distilling these
annotations into smaller discriminative models for high-
throughput deployment.
7. Conclusion
In this work, we presented an LLM-based, taxonomy-
agnostic pipeline for annotating explicitly transmitted
PII values in HTTP message bodies. The pipeline com-
bines deterministic normalisation, label-level classifica-
tion, targeted value extraction, and an inference control
layer based on RAG and output validation. To mitigate
labelled-data scarcity, we further introduced a taxonomy-
driven synthetic HTTP message generator that produces
ground-truth annotated traffic for controlled evaluation
and exemplar-based prompting. Our evaluation shows that
the pipeline can identify PII types and extract corre-
sponding values under runtime-specified taxonomies, with
strong performance on concrete PII and PHI taxonomies
and lower, but still informative, performance on broader
policy-facing labels.
These findings highlight that taxonomy-agnostic PII
value annotation can support privacy auditing workflows
that must adapt to evolving regulatory, organisational, or
sector-specific taxonomies without retraining. The abil-
ity to re-annotate the same traffic under alternative tax-
onomies also provides a route towards improved compara-
bility across empirical studies whose label schemes differ
in domain focus and granularity. At the same time, our
results underline that taxonomy design, payload structure,
and boundary fidelity materially affect annotation quality.
Future work should therefore validate the approach on
real-world traffic captures, including obfuscated or trans-
formed values; extend evaluation beyond request bodies
to headers, paths, queries, cookies, and responses; and
improve reliability and cost-efficiency through selective
or heterogeneous review. We consider the most promising
path for future research and deployment to be a hybrid
one: using LLM-based annotation to create or refine la-
belled data under evolving taxonomies, and subsequently
distilling these annotations into smaller discriminative
models for high-throughput deployment.
Data Availability and use of Generative AI
Although generative AI is the main focus of this paper,
all content was created manually. We did, however, use
generative AI tools to polish the text and fix mistakes.
You can access our source code and datasets on GitHub:


References
[1]
ai4privacy/pii Masking-200k.
Datasets at hugging face.
https:
//huggingface.co/datasets/ai4privacy/pii-masking-200k, 2023. [Ac-
cessed 26-02-2026].
[2]
Edward Choi, Siddharth Biswal, Bradley Malin, Jon Duke, Wal-
ter F Stewart, and Jimeng Sun.
Generating multi-label discrete
patient records using generative adversarial networks.
Machine
learning for healthcare conference, pages 286-305, 2017.
[3]
Thomas Cory, Wolf Rieder, and Thu-My Huynh.
A qualitative
analysis framework for mhealth privacy practices. In 2024 IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (Eu-
roS&PW), pages 24-31. IEEE, 2024.
[4]
Thomas Cory, Wolf Rieder, Julia Kr¨amer, Philip Raschke, Patrick
Herbke, and Axel K¨upper. Word-level annotation of gdpr trans-
parency compliance in privacy policies using large language mod-
els. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 1:509-528,
2026.
[5]
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) - Articles 13 and 14, 2016.
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement
of such data.
[6]
Mila Grancharova and Hercules Dalianis. Applying and sharing
pre-trained bert-models for named entity recognition and classifi-
cation in swedish electronic patient records. In Proceedings of the
23rd nordic conference on computational linguistics (NoDaLiDa),
pages 231-239, 2021.
[7]
James Jordon, Jinsung Yoon, and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Pate-
gan: Generating synthetic data with differential privacy guarantees.
In International conference on learning representations, 2018.
[8]
Rishika Kohli, Shaifu Gupta, Manoj Singh Gaur, and Soma S
Dhavala. Learning to detect pii: Tabular vs. document classification
models for network traffic analysis. Journal of Information Security
and Applications, 94:104196, 2025.
[9]
Anh Le, Janus Varmarken, Simon Langhoff, Anastasia Shuba,
Minas Gjoka, and Athina Markopoulou.
Antmonitor: A system
for monitoring from mobile devices. In Proceedings of the 2015
ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Crowdsourcing and Crowdsharing
of Big (Internet) Data, pages 15-20, 2015.
[10] Sascha L¨obner, Jetzabel Serna, Fr´ed´eric Tronnier, Welderufael
Tesfay, and Kai Rannenberg.
Mitigating bias in recruitment:
A practical approach to cv de-identification considering privacy
sensitive information. In International Conference on Availability,
Reliability and Security, pages 174-192. Springer, 2025.
[11] Luca Mainetti and Andrea Elia. Detecting personally identifiable
information through natural language processing: A step forward.
Applied System Innovation, 8(2):55, 2025.
[12] Bharti Meena, Joanna Skubisz, Harshit Rajgarhia, Nand Dave,
Kiran Ganesh, Shivali Dalmia, Abhishek Mukherji, Vasudevan
Sundarababu, and Olga Pospelova. Scalable multilingual pii an-
notation for responsible ai in llms. In 2025 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), pages 367-375.
IEEE, 2025.
[13] Google Play. Provide information for google play’s data safety
section. 
answer/10787469#zippy=%2Cdata-types, 2021. [Accessed 26-02-
2026].
[14] Abbas Razaghpanah, Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez, Srikanth Sundare-
san, Christian Kreibich, Phillipa Gill, Mark Allman, and Vern
Paxson. Haystack: A multi-purpose mobile vantage point in user
space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.01419, 2015.
[15] Anat Reiner Benaim, Ronit Almog, Yuri Gorelik, Irit Hochberg,
Laila Nassar, Tanya Mashiach, Mogher Khamaisi, Yael Lurie,
Zaher S Azzam, Johad Khoury, et al. Analyzing medical research
results based on synthetic data and their relation to real data results:
systematic comparison from five observational studies.
JMIR
medical informatics, 8(2):e16492, 2020.
[16] Jingjing Ren, Martina Lindorfer, Daniel J Dubois, Ashwin Rao,
David Choffnes, and Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez.
A longitudinal
study of pii leaks across android app versions. In Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), volume 10, 2018.
[17] Jingjing Ren, Ashwin Rao, Martina Lindorfer, Arnaud Legout,
and David Choffnes. Recon: Revealing and controlling pii leaks
in mobile network traffic.
In Proceedings of the 14th Annual
International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services, pages 361-374, 2016.
[18] Maksim Savkin, Timur Ionov, and Vasily Konovalov. Spy: Enhanc-
ing privacy with synthetic pii detection dataset. In Proceedings of
the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (Volume 4: Student Research Workshop), pages 236-
246, 2025.
[19] Maximilian Schmidhuber and Udo Kruschwitz. Llm-based syn-
thetic datasets: Applications and limitations in toxicity detection.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Threat, Aggression &
Cyberbullying@ LREC-COLING-2024, pages 37-51, 2024.
[20] Hao Shen, Zhouhong Gu, Haokai Hong, and Weili Han. Pii-bench:
Evaluating query-aware privacy protection systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.18545, 2025.
[21] Yihang Song and Urs Hengartner.
Privacyguard: A vpn-based
platform to detect information leakage on android devices.
In
Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM CCS Workshop on Security
and Privacy in Smartphones and Mobile Devices, pages 15-26,
2015.
[22] Gaurav Srivastava, Kunal Bhuwalka, Swarup Kumar Sahoo, Sak-
sham Chitkara, Kevin Ku, Matt Fredrikson, Jason Hong, and Yuvraj
Agarwal.
Privacyproxy: Leveraging crowdsourcing and in situ
traffic analysis to detect and mitigate information leakage. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.06384, 2017.
[23] State of California. California consumer privacy act of 2018, AB
375. California Legislative Information, 2018. Accessed: 2026-02-
27.
[24] Maria Irena Szawerna, Simon Dobnik, Ricardo Munoz S´anchez,
and Elena Volodina. The devil’s in the details: the detailedness
of classes influences personal information detection and labeling.
In Proceedings of the Joint 25th Nordic Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and 11th Baltic Conference on Human Language
Technologies (NoDaLiDa/Baltic-HLT 2025), pages 697-708, 2025.
[25] Maria Irena Szawerna, Simon Dobnik, Therese Lindstr¨om Tiede-
mann, Ricardo Mu˜noz S´anchez, Xuan-Son Vu, and Elena Volo-
dina.
Pseudonymization categories across domain boundaries.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-COLING 2024), pages 13303-13314, 2024.
[26] Shuhe Wang, Xiaofei Sun, Xiaoya Li, Rongbin Ouyang, Fei Wu,
Tianwei Zhang, Jiwei Li, Guoyin Wang, and Chen Guo. Gpt-ner:
Named entity recognition via large language models. Findings of
the association for computational linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages
4257-4275, 2025.
[27] Lei Xu, Maria Skoularidou, Alfredo Cuesta-Infante, and Kalyan
Veeramachaneni.
Modeling tabular data using conditional gan.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[28] Jianliang Yang, Xiya Zhang, Kai Liang, and Yuenan Liu.
Ex-
ploring the application of large language models in detecting and
protecting personally identifiable information in archival data: a
comprehensive study. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on
Big Data (BigData), pages 2116-2123. IEEE, 2023.
[29] Hang Zeng, Xiangyu Liu, Yong Hu, Chaoyue Niu, Fan Wu,
Shaojie Tang, and Guihai Chen. Automated privacy information
annotation in large language model interactions.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.20910, 2025.

Appendix A.
Evaluation Results
TABLE 2. PER-STEP PRECISION (P), RECALL (R), AND F1 AT LABEL LEVEL AND INSTANCE LEVEL (FUZZY AND EXACT) ACROSS ALL THREE
TAXONOMIES.
Label-Level
Fuzzy Instance
Exact Instance
Dataset/Stage
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
AI4Privacy
Classifier
0.9779
0.9942
0.9860
-
-
-
-
-
-
Annotator (single-stage)
0.9838
0.9877
0.9857
0.9671
0.9769
0.9720
0.9329
0.9425
0.9377
Annotator (two-stage)
0.9836
0.9942
0.9888
0.9685
0.9869
0.9776
0.9348
0.9529
0.9438
Reviewer (single-stage)
0.9797
0.9914
0.9855
0.9583
0.9766
0.9674
0.9231
0.9409
0.9319
Reviewer (two-stage)
0.9812
0.9942
0.9876
0.9650
0.9845
0.9747
0.9306
0.9496
0.9400
mHealth
Classifier
0.9781
0.9936
0.9858
-
-
-
-
-
-
Annotator (single-stage)
0.9813
0.9872
0.9843
0.9552
0.9635
0.9593
0.9511
0.9587
0.9549
Annotator (two-stage)
0.9824
0.9938
0.9880
0.9627
0.9781
0.9703
0.9584
0.9733
0.9658
Reviewer (single-stage)
0.9834
0.9907
0.9870
0.9572
0.9627
0.9599
0.9522
0.9574
0.9548
Reviewer (two-stage)
0.9841
0.9922
0.9881
0.9612
0.9682
0.9647
0.9563
0.9632
0.9597
PlayStore
Classifier
0.8718
0.9538
0.9109
-
-
-
-
-
-
Annotator (single-stage)
0.9044
0.9138
0.9091
0.8576
0.8691
0.8633
0.8001
0.8121
0.8061
Annotator (two-stage)
0.8899
0.9488
0.9184
0.8285
0.8995
0.8625
0.7698
0.8354
0.8012
Reviewer (single-stage)
0.8863
0.9251
0.9053
0.8370
0.8780
0.8570
0.7822
0.8222
0.8017
Reviewer (two-stage)
0.8755
0.9425
0.9078
0.8196
0.8945
0.8554
0.7633
0.8346
0.7973

Appendix B.
Annotator System Prompt
You are a **PII value annotator** for privacy research. Your task is to identify and label **all PII values** that appear in a given **HTTP request body** (
payload). The output will be used to evaluate PII classifiers and masking/annotation models.
You will be given:
- A **PII taxonomy table** (authoritative label scheme with `PII Data type` values).
- One HTTP **body** as a raw text string. The body may be JSON, form-encoded (`key=value&...`), multipart metadata (text fields only), XML, logs, plain text, or
nonstandard/obfuscated formats.
**Important assumption:** The body is already fully decoded upstream. Do not apply URL decoding or other decoding. Annotate exactly what you see.
---
## 1) Output format
Return **ONLY** a valid JSON object matching this schema:
- Top-level object has exactly one key: `annotations`
- `annotations` is an array of objects
- Each object has exactly:
- `data_type` (string): the PII data type of the annotated value
- `value` (string): the exact PII span as it appears in the body
No additional keys are allowed anywhere.
No commentary, no markdown, no code fences - **output JSON only**.
Example structure (illustrative only):
```json
{
'annotations': [
{ 'data_type': '<EXACT_TAXONOMY_LABEL>', 'value': '<VERBATIM_SUBSTRING_FROM_BODY>' }
]
}
```
---
## 2) Taxonomy adherence
- You MUST use **ONLY** `PII Data type` values that appear in the provided taxonomy table.
- For every annotation, **copy the `data_type` string verbatim** from the taxonomy (exact case, spacing, punctuation). Do not paraphrase.
- Do **not** assume any particular labels exist. The taxonomy may vary between tasks.
- Any examples in this prompt are **illustrative of disambiguation logic only**; they are *not* a guaranteed list of valid labels. If an example label is not
present in the provided taxonomy, you MUST NOT use it.
- If a potential PII value does not clearly match any taxonomy `PII Data type`, **do not annotate it**.
---
## 3) What to annotate
Annotate **PII values** present in the body. Values may appear in:
- JSON objects/arrays
- Form-encoded bodies
- XML attributes/text
- Plain text lines
- Nonstandard payloads with unusual separators or obfuscated keys
Annotate the **PII value only**, not the key name or surrounding syntax.
Examples:
- Good: `john.doe@example.com`
- Bad: `email=john.doe@example.com`
- Good: `+49 30 1234567890`
- Bad: `phone:+49 30 1234567890`
Keep punctuation that is inherently part of the value (e.g., `@` in email, `+` in phone, hyphens in UUID-like identifiers).
---
## 4) Span rules
1. **Minimal span**: select the smallest substring that is the PII value (exclude keys, quotes, separators, and surrounding whitespace).
2. **Multi-value lists**: if multiple PII values appear in a list (comma-separated, array, repeated fields), annotate **each value separately**.
3. **Split across fields**: if a combined concept is split into multiple fields, annotate each field's value separately.
- Example: `firstname=John&lastname=Doe`: annotate `John` and `Doe` separately (do NOT create a single 'John Doe' value).
4. **Deduplicate repeated values (strong rule)**: deduplicate **globally by exact value string**.
- If the **exact same value string** appears multiple times anywhere in the body (even under different keys), include it **only once** in `annotations`.
- Do not attempt 'semantic deduplication' (e.g., do not merge `John` and `Doe`).
5. **No inference**: annotate only what is explicitly present; do not guess missing pieces or reconstruct values.
---
## 5) Use context to resolve ambiguity
Many values are ambiguous in isolation (especially numbers and short strings). Use **surrounding context**such as nearby keys, units, structural position, and
typical formattingto choose the correct type **when possible**.
- Only annotate a value if the context makes the type **reasonably unambiguous**.
- If you cannot disambiguate confidently, **do not annotate**.
Examples of *logic* (labels shown are placeholders; use only labels that exist in the provided taxonomy):
- If the key is `sdk_version` or `api_level` and the value is `31`, map it to the taxonomy's API-level-like data type (if present).
- If the key is `age` and the value is `29`, map it to the taxonomy's age-like data type (if present).
- If the key is `weight` and the value includes units like `kg`/`lb`, map it to the taxonomy's body-weight-like type (if present).
- If the key is `tz` and the value looks like `Europe/Berlin`, map it to the taxonomy's timezone-like type (if present).
Counterexample:
- A bare `31` with no key, unit, or context: do not annotate.
---
## 6) Disambiguation guidance
Prefer the **most specific** matching taxonomy type when context supports it. Use value patterns + nearby keys (not guesses). If the taxonomy does not contain a
matching specific type, do not 'approximate' with an unrelated label.
If a value could match multiple types and context does not resolve it, **do not annotate**.
---
## 7) Quality checklist
Before returning output:
- Output is valid JSON and conforms exactly to the schema (no extra keys).
- Every `data_type` exactly matches a taxonomy `PII Data type` (verbatim).
- Every `value` is an exact substring from the provided body (verbatim).
- All detectable, context-resolvable taxonomy-matching PII values are included.
- Exact-duplicate values are included only once.
Return only the JSON object.

Appendix C.
Label Taxonomies
TABLE 3. AI4PRIVACY PII-MASKING-200K LABEL TAXONOMY [1], [11].
PII Data type
Sensitivity
level
Description
Name
medium
Personal name string
Email
high
Email address identifier
Phone number
high
Telephone number (international/national format)
Credit card number
high
Payment card number (PAN)
Passport number
high
Passport identifier / MRZ-style string
Social security number
high
National SSN-style identifier
Date of birth
medium
Birth date (ISO or locale-specific format)
Address
medium
Postal address (street, number, city)
Zip code
medium
Postal/ZIP code
IP address
high
IPv4/IPv6 network address
Bank account number
high
Bank account identifier (e.g., IBAN-like)
Routing number
medium
Bank routing / sort code identifier
Driver’s license number
medium
Driver’s licence identifier
License plate number
medium
Vehicle registration plate
Vehicle identification number
low
Vehicle identification number (VIN)
Bank account details
high
Structured banking details (account type, sort code, holder)
Medical record number
high
Hospital/clinic record identifier (MRN-style)
Health insurance number
high
Health insurance member/policy identifier
Employee number
medium
Employee identifier
Student ID
medium
Student identifier
Government ID
high
Government-issued identifier (national ID style)
Geolocation
high
Place name or coarse location token (e.g., geohash)
Biometric data
high
Biometric template/embedding representation
Mother’s maiden name
medium
Maiden name token
Family member names
medium
Names of relatives/household members
Place of birth
medium
Birthplace (city/region)
Citizenship
medium
Citizenship code(s) or status
Gender
medium
Gender identity value
Sexual orientation
medium
Sexual orientation category
Race/ethnicity
medium
Race/ethnicity category
Nationality
medium
Nationality descriptor
Religious beliefs
medium
Religious affiliation / belief category
Political affiliation
medium
Political affiliation category
Professional license number
medium
Professional licence identifier (e.g., medical/bar)
Education history
medium
Education credential/history snippet
Employment history
medium
Employment record snippet
Income level
low
Income bracket / level indicator
Financial status
low
Financial ratio/band indicator (e.g., debt-to-income)
Social media handles
low
Social media username/handle
Account numbers
high
Customer/account identifier(s)
Transaction history
high
Transaction record snippet (amount, merchant, timestamp)
Digital signature
high
Cryptographic signature token (e.g., base64)
Purchase history
medium
Purchase/order record snippet
Subscription information
medium
Subscription plan/status metadata
Health information (e.g., conditions, treatments)
high
Health condition/treatment/medication mention
Emergency contact information
low
Emergency contact name/relationship/phone
Insurance policy number
high
Insurance policy identifier
Academic records
medium
Academic performance record (grades/GPA)
Tax identification number
low
Tax identifier string
License key or serial number
medium
Product licence key / serial number
Location data (GPS)
high
GPS coordinates or latitude/longitude pair

TABLE 4. PII/PHI LABEL TAXONOMY FOR MHEALTH APPS (CORY ET AL. (2024) [3]).
PII Category
PII Subcategory
PII Data type
Description
Device or other IDs
Hardware identifiers
Device model
The commercial model name of the user’s device hardware.
Screen resolution
The pixel dimensions of the device’s display, often reported as width
× height.
Software identifiers
Carrier name
The name of the mobile network operator or SIM provider.
OS build
The operating system build identifier or version string.
API level
The numeric API level of the operating system (e.g., Android SDK
level).
Location
Approximate location
Locale
The locale setting reflecting language and region preferences.
Timezone
The user’s time zone specification.
Country
The country or region name associated with the user’s location.
Country code
The ISO country code representing the user’s country.
City
The name of the city or town where the user is located.
Precise location
Latitude
The GPS latitude coordinate, often in decimal degrees.
Longitude
The GPS longitude coordinate, often in decimal degrees.
Personal info
User identifiers
Name
How a user identifies themselves, such as their first and last name
or nickname.
Email address
A user’s email address.
Advertising ID
A unique, resettable identifier used for advertising and analytics.
Age
A user’s age in years.
Date of birth
The user’s birth date, often as day-month-year.
Gender
The gender identity reported by the user.
Fitness info
Body measurements
Body height
The user’s height measurement.
Body weight
The user’s current body weight.
Body weight goal
The target weight that the user aims to achieve.
Fitness info
Step count
The number of steps the user has taken in a defined period.
Eating habits
Information about the user’s diet patterns or dietary preferences.
Fitness goals
Specific fitness targets set by the user.
Fitness level
The user’s assessed fitness level or self-reported status.
Mental wellbeing
Qualitative information on the user’s mental or emotional health
status.
Sleep habits
Patterns in the user’s sleep, such as average hours or bedtime.
Health info
Female health info
Menstrual cycle length
The length of the user’s menstrual cycle.
Period start date
The date when the user’s menstrual period begins.
Period length
The number of days the user’s menstrual period lasts.
Period symptoms
Recorded symptoms experienced during menstruation.
Birth control
The contraceptive method used.
Medical info
Sexual activity
Information regarding sexual behaviour or activity frequency.
Body temperature
Body temperature readings, typically in degrees Celsius or Fahren-
heit.
Heart rate
Beats per minute measurement of the user’s heart rate.
Blood pressure
Systolic and diastolic pressure readings.
Glucose levels
The user’s blood glucose measurement.
Medical conditions
Recorded medical diagnoses or health conditions.

TABLE 5. GOOGLE PLAY DATA SAFETY LABEL TAXONOMY [13].
PII Category
PII Data type
Description
Location
Approximate location
User or device physical location to an area greater than or equal to 3 square
kilometres, such as the city a user is in, or location provided by Android’s
ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION permission.
Precise location
User or device physical location within an area less than 3 square kilometres,
such as location provided by Android’s ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION permis-
sion.
Personal info
Name
How a user refers to themselves, such as their first or last name, or nickname.
Email address
A user’s email address.
User IDs
Identifiers that relate to an identifiable person. For example, an account ID,
account number, or account name.
Address
A user’s address, such as a mailing or home address.
Phone number
A user’s phone number.
Race and ethnicity
Information about a user’s race or ethnicity.
Political or religious beliefs
Information about a user’s political or religious beliefs.
Sexual orientation
Information about a user’s sexual orientation.
Other info
Any other personal information such as date of birth, gender identity, veteran
status, etc.
Financial info
User payment info
Information about a user’s financial accounts, such as credit card number.
Purchase history
Information about purchases or transactions a user has made.
Credit score
Information about a user’s credit score.
Other financial info
Any other financial information, such as user salary or debts.
Health and fitness
Health info
Information about a user’s health, such as medical records or symptoms.
Fitness info
Information about a user’s fitness, such as exercise or other physical activity.
Messages
Emails
A user’s emails, including the email subject line, sender, recipients, and the
content of the email.
SMS or MMS
A user’s text messages, including the sender, recipients, and the content of the
message.
Other in-app messages
Any other types of messages. For example, instant messages or chat content.
Photos and videos
Photos
A user’s photos.
Videos
A user’s videos.
Audio files
Voice or sound recordings
A user’s voice, such as a voicemail or a sound recording.
Music files
A user’s music files.
Other audio files
Any other user-created or user-provided audio files.
Files and docs
Files and docs
A user’s files or documents, or information about their files or documents,
such as file names.
Calendar
Calendar events
Information from a user’s calendar, such as events, event notes, and attendees.
Contacts
Contacts
Information about the user’s contacts, such as contact names, message his-
tory, and social graph information like usernames, contact recency, contact
frequency, interaction duration and call history.
App activity
App interactions
Information about how a user interacts with the app. For example, the number
of times they visit a page or sections they tap on.
In-app search history
Information about what a user has searched for in your app.
Installed apps
Information about the apps installed on a user’s device.
Other user-generated content
Any other user-generated content not listed here, or in any other section. For
example, user bios, notes, or open-ended responses.
Other actions
Any other user activity or actions in-app not listed here, such as gameplay,
likes, and dialogue options.
Web browsing
Web browsing history
Information about the websites a user has visited.
App info and performance
Crash logs
Crash log data from your app. For example, the number of times your app
has crashed, stack traces, or other information directly related to a crash.
Diagnostics
Information about the performance of your app, such as battery life, loading
time, latency, framerate, or any technical diagnostics.
Other app performance data
Any other app performance data not listed here.
Device or other IDs
Device or other IDs
Identifiers that relate to an individual device, browser or app. For example, an
IMEI number, MAC address, Widevine Device ID, Firebase installation ID,
or advertising identifier.