AUTOMATED SAFETY IS HARDER THAN YOU THINK
Aleksandr Bowkis
AI Security Institute
aleksandr.bowkis@dsit.gov.uk
Marie Davidsen Buhl
AI Security Institute
marie.buhl@dsit.gov.uk
Jacob Pfau
AI Security Institute
jacob.pfau@dsit.gov.uk
Geoffrey Irving
AI Security Institute
geoffrey.irving@dsit.gov.uk
ABSTRACT
A leading proposal for aligning artificial superintelligence (ASI) is to use AI agents to automate
an increasing fraction of alignment research as capabilities improve. We argue that, even
when research agents are not scheming to deliberately sabotage alignment work, this plan
could produce compelling but catastrophically misleading safety assessments resulting in the
unintentional deployment of misaligned AI. This could happen because alignment research
involves many hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks (tasks without clear evaluation criteria, for which
human judgement is systematically flawed). Consequently, research outputs will contain
systematic, undetected errors, and even correct outputs could be incorrectly aggregated
into overconfident safety assessments. This problem is likely to be worse for automated
alignment research than for human-generated alignment research for several reasons: 1)
optimisation pressure means agent-generated mistakes are concentrated among those that
human reviewers are least likely to catch; 2) agents are likely to produce errors that do
not resemble human mistakes; 3) AI-generated alignment solutions may involve arguments
humans cannot evaluate; and 4) shared weights, data and training processes may make
AI outputs more correlated than human equivalents. Therefore, agents must be trained to
reliably perform hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks. Generalisation and scalable oversight are
the leading candidates for achieving this but both face novel challenges in the context of
automated alignment.
Introduction
Alignment of artificial superintelligence (ASI) is an important, unsolved research problem1. AI research agents
may help solve this problem, for example via the following plan:
• Build AI agents that can do empirical alignment work (e.g. writing code, running experiments,
designing evaluations and red teaming) and confirm they are not scheming.
• Use these agents to build increasingly sophisticated empirical safety cases for each successive genera-
tion of agents, gradually automating more of the research process.
• Hand over primary research responsibility once agents outperform humans at all relevant alignment
tasks.
This paper argues that automating alignment research in this manner could produce catastrophically mis-
leading safety assessments, causing researchers to believe that an egregiously misaligned AI is safe, even if
1The definition of what constitutes ASI, and the degree to which misaligned ASI poses a significant risk, is contested.
arXiv:2605.06390v1 [cs.AI] 7 May 2026

AI agents are not scheming to deliberately sabotage alignment research. Our core argument (Fig. 1) is as
follows:
1. The goal of an automated alignment program is to produce an overall safety assessment (OSA) - an
estimate of the probability that the next-generation agent is non-scheming - that is both calibrated
and shows low risk.2
2. Producing an OSA involves several tasks that are difficult to check. We refer to these as hard-
to-supervise fuzzy tasks: tasks without clear evaluation criteria, for which human judgement is
systematically flawed. Two particularly important such tasks are3:
1. Measuring what you care about: The alignment properties of a sufficiently advanced AI are not
directly measurable. We cannot safely deploy the AI in situations where it could cause serious
harm and observe whether it takes misaligned actions. Instead, research must target alignment
proxies (e.g. honesty evaluations, model organism experiments, whitebox probes) and then
make a judgement about how relevant the results are for alignment of the AI.
2. Aggregating correlated evidence: OSAs will likely rely on multiple pieces of evidence. If each
piece of evidence is independent, aggregating them into an OSA would be straightforward. In
practice, however, there will be uncertainty about the conclusions from each research output and
these uncertainties will be correlated. This happens because research outputs share assumptions
and methodologies; because research agents share weights, training processes and data; and
because human researchers share systematic biases. If these correlations are mis-modelled, the
resulting OSA is flawed and this can lead to alignment failures, even if no individual piece of
evidence is wrong.
Because these tasks are hard to supervise, research outputs (including OSAs) will contain systematic,
undetected errors, regardless of whether these tasks are completed by human researchers or research agents
trained using human data.
3. Of course, such errors are present in human-generated alignment research. However, errors in
automated alignment research are likely to be harder to identify, and therefore more numerous,
than the human baseline. There are five reasons for this:
1. Optimisation pressure: AI research is optimised for human approval to a greater extent than
human research, and so any errors are concentrated among those that human reviewers are least
likely to catch.
2. Alien mistakes: Agents may introduce errors that do not resemble human mistakes. Reviewers
may struggle to identify these, even if they are in principle easy to correct.
3. More correlated research: Shared weights, training processes and data sources for agents
introduce additional correlation structure relative to human-generated research.
4. Research volume: OSAs based on AI research may reference much larger evidence bases,
increasing the potential for complex and hard-to-spot correlations between research outputs.
5. Non-human-evaluable arguments: Alignment solutions for ASI may rely on arguments that
humans are unable to follow, making errors impossible to identify.
In most domains, iteration is able to correct for undetected errors. Mistakes not caught during one experiment
are often surfaced by subsequent research or real-world system behaviour. Unfortunately, alignment lacks
the safe feedback loops that are required for such an error-correction process to work: producing an overly
optimistic OSA could result in the deployment of a misaligned AI before the error is caught, which could
2An OSA can take many forms (e.g. a safety case, risk report, or judgement by an individual human or AI, or a
compilation of empirical evidence from red teaming efforts).
3Another important, hard-to-supervise fuzzy task is steering a body of research and allocating resources efficiently
between research directions. This involves assessing whether individual research directions are worth pursuing and
whether the research corpus is sufficiently broad.
be catastrophic. Therefore, we need to train agents to reliably perform well on these hard-to-supervise
fuzzy tasks the first time. Direct training using human feedback on these hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks is not
sufficient as human approval does not indicate correctness. Two alternatives remain:
Generalisation: Train agents on easier-to-supervise training proxies and rely on generalisation to the hard-
to-supervise fuzzy research tasks we care about. This requires us to predict generalisation behaviour, since
performance on the hard-to-supervise fuzzy task cannot be evaluated directly.
Scalable oversight: Improve the reward signal for hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks, for example by decomposing
them into easier-to-supervise subtasks. Existing protocols (e.g. recursive reward modelling or debate) may
not work, because they do not have a good solution to the problem of aggregating correlated evidence.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 sketches an automated alignment program as background context
for the rest of the paper. Section 3 explains why hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks are pervasive in alignment
research and why this leads to more undetected, systematic errors than the human baseline. Section 4 argues
that these errors will be hard to prevent and outlines the open research problems in scalable oversight and
generalisation. Section 5 concludes with future research directions.
O U T P U T - L E V E L F A I L U R E
Some research outputs are incorrect, leading to an incorrect OSA.
STAGE 1 RESEARCH GENERATION
STAGE 2 AGGREGATION
STAGE 3 DEPLOYMENT
ALIGNMENT PROXIES
RESEARCH
OUTPUTS
the target -
not directly measurable
PROXY 1
OUTPUT 1
✓ approved
PROXY 2
OUTPUT 2
✓ approved
PROXY 3
OUTPUT 3
✓ approved
P(not scheming) = 0.97 ± 0.2
✓ approved
- incorrect
Figure 1(a): Output-level failures: undetected systematic errors in individual research outputs.
A G G R E G A T I O N - L E V E L F A I L U R E
Even when individual research outputs are correct, aggregation failures can lead to incorrect OSAs.
STAGE 1 RESEARCH GENERATION
STAGE 2 AGGREGATION
STAGE 3 DEPLOYMENT
ALIGNMENT PROXIES
RESEARCH
OUTPUTS
the target -
not directly measurable
PROXY 1
OUTPUT 1
✓ approved
PROXY 2
OUTPUT 2
✓ approved
PROXY 3
OUTPUT 3
✓ approved
P(not scheming) = 0.97 ± 0.2
✓ approved
- incorrect
Figure 1(b): Aggregation-level failures: flawed combination of correct research outputs.
Figure 1: Automated alignment can fail, leading to the deployment of a misaligned AI, if research outputs contain
undetected systematic errors (a) or if the aggregation of research outputs is flawed (b). Since alignment cannot be
measured directly, research instead targets alignment proxies (model organisms, honesty evaluations, whitebox probes
etc.). Incorrect judgement about the implications of results for alignment can lead to systematic, undetected errors in
individual research outputs. Aggregation of outputs can lead to incorrect overall safety assessments, even when individual
outputs are correct, if the correlation between the uncertainties in each research output is mis-modelled (Sec. 3.3.2).
2
An automated alignment research program
To ground our analysis, this section paints a rough picture of what an automated alignment research program
might look like. The plan is inspired by (but not identical to) plans proposed elsewhere such as Carlsmith
(2025); Clymer (2025); Leike (2022).
We model AI development as a discrete sequence of agents, indexed by iteration N, with capabilities increasing
monotonically. Each agent is released with a fixed capability profile and is eventually superseded by its
successor. At each iteration, an automated alignment research program uses multiple instances of Agent N,
together with human researchers, to research alignment techniques for the next-generation model, Agent
N+1. The final output of the research process is an overall safety assessment (OSA): a calibrated estimate
of the probability P(Agent N+1 is not scheming | evidence)4. If the OSA is good enough, Agent N+1 is
deployed-including as part of the workforce that produces the OSA for Agent N+2. As N grows, humans
delegate a greater fraction of the research process to agents.
This plan requires that the initial Agent 0 is not scheming 5. The plan then bootstraps its way towards an OSA
for an arbitrarily powerful ASI: Agent 0 provides the evidence that Agent 1 is not scheming, Agent 1 provides
the evidence that Agent 2 is not scheming, and so on. The hope is that if the capability gap remains small at
each stage the additional research required to align Agent N+1 is within the scope of Agent N.
Figure 2: An automated alignment research program (AARP) uses both human and Agent research labour to produce
alignment research with the goal of combining this into an overall safety assessment (OSA): a calibrated probability
estimate that the next generation agent is not scheming. As automation progresses, agents perform a greater fraction of
research tasks.
4We use "overall safety assessment" rather than "safety case" because it is more general: an OSA could be produced by
a safety case, a risk report grounded in red teaming, or a model trained to output calibrated probabilities directly. We
require a calibrated probability rather than a binary judgement so that informed decisions can be made about acceptable
risk.
5An agent is not scheming if it does not covertly and strategically pursue a hidden objective (Meinke et al., 2025). This
definition permits isolated misaligned behaviours such as reward hacking. We take it to be a realistic assumption for early
research agents.
3
The ‘undetected errors’ failure mode
Two of the ways in which the above plan could fail are:
1. Research sabotage: If the initial OSA is incorrect and Agent 0 is scheming, it could undermine
alignment research, resulting in further alignment failures.
2. No alignment solution is found: The combined efforts of Agent N and human researchers may be
insufficient to find an alignment solution for Agent N+1. In this case we fail to align Agent N+1 but
are aware of our failure.
While these failure modes are important, we set them aside for the remainder of the paper. We argue that
even absent these problems, there is a third reason automated alignment research might fail:
Undetected systematic errors: At any stage, the research outputs and the OSA produced
by the automated alignment program could appear compelling but in fact contain critical,
undetected errors. In this case, we fail to align Agent N+1 but are (incorrectly) confident
that we have succeeded.
This section presents the case for worrying about undetected systematic errors. Our core claims are that
alignment research involves important fuzzy tasks (Sec. 3.1), that many of these tasks are hard-to-supervise
(Sec. 3.2) and that this causes automated alignment research to contain systematic errors that both humans
and agents fail to spot, leading to false confidence in alignment (Sec. 3.3).
3.1
Alignment research involves important fuzzy tasks
Following Leike (2024), we can think of research tasks as lying on a spectrum from crisp to fuzzy.
Crisp tasks have clear evaluation criteria: success is verifiable and experts reliably agree on correct answers -
for example, proving a mathematical result or writing code for an experiment.
Fuzzy tasks lack clear evaluation criteria - whether an output is good is harder to specify, and reasonable
experts may disagree. Examples include identifying objects in images or reaching a conclusion about the
implications of a research paper.
Fuzzy tasks are particularly prevalent in alignment research compared to capabilities research. This is because
for capabilities research, the properties that are being targeted are generally easy to measure, resulting in tight
feedback loops: a model is trained, its performance is evaluated against a benchmark, the training process is
updated and this process repeats. In alignment, the true feedback signal (whether a deployed model takes a
misaligned action) is not available. Research must therefore target alignment proxies: behavioral evaluations,
whitebox signals, red teaming results, testing techniques on weaker, safer models etc. Inferring conclusions
about alignment from these proxies is a difficult fuzzy judgement.
AI agents will likely perform increasingly many and difficult fuzzy tasks as automation progresses. For
illustration, consider the following two sketches of how fuzziness might enter during the early and late stages
of automated alignment research.
3.1.1
Early Stages of Automation
An early stage of automation might look like this:
AI agents perform relatively open-ended research tasks, for example optimising against alignment metrics
(Wen et al., 2026), generating evaluation environments (Anthropic Alignment Science Team, 2025), and
monitoring model outputs for misaligned behaviour (Gasteiger et al., 2025; Greenblatt et al., 2023).
Humans set the targets and high-level research directions. They also assemble OSAs from AI-generated and
human-generated evidence (this could even be implicitly via surveys of research staff (Anthropic, 2026)). An
early-stage OSA might consist of a large body of experiments showing a model behaves in an aligned manner
across diverse contexts, supplemented by whitebox evidence about internal representations.
At this stage, humans perform most of the load-bearing fuzzy tasks: judging how AI-generated research
generalises beyond the experimental settings, assessing whether models are Goodharting metrics (Manheim
and Garrabrant, 2018) rather than improving on the underlying alignment properties, evaluating how
representative the experimental coverage is, and making an overall judgement about whether the evidence
as a whole is sufficient. While agents perform tasks that appear crisp, those tasks contain many judgement
calls about details. For example, automated red teaming involves calls such as which behaviours to look for,
how to construct an environment, how to interpret a given trajectory, and how to present results. These calls
impact bigger fuzzy tasks, such as judging experiment validity and correlations.
3.1.2
Later Stage of Automation
A later stage of automated alignment research might look like this:
AI agents generate new research paradigms and metrics (for example, generating ideas such as weak-to-
strong generalisation and metrics such as performance gap recovered (Burns et al., 2023). They also propose
directions within those paradigms and increasingly assemble OSAs themselves. These OSAs may initially look
similar to human OSAs but increasingly drift towards using concepts and structures that are unfamiliar to
humans.
Humans evaluate AI-generated research outputs, including OSAs, provide high-level steering and decide
resource allocation. The role of human researchers at this stage is analogous to a funding body evaluating the
outputs from a research grant.
Agents now perform many of the load-bearing fuzzy research tasks.
3.2
Alignment involves many hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks
A key property of fuzzy tasks is how difficult they are for humans to supervise. Some fuzzy tasks are easy for
humans to judge, even if it is hard to specify precisely why an output is correct (e.g. identifying whether an
image contains a bus). Other fuzzy tasks are hard to supervise: human judgement about whether an output
is correct is systematically flawed (Fig. 3) .
Figure 3: Examples of tasks placed on the easy-to-supervise vs hard-to-supervise spectrum.
Many research tasks are examples of hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks. We can see this from the history of science
where human judgement has been consistently unreliable: whole fields have refused to adopt well-supported
ideas, or expended huge effort investigating unproductive hypotheses.
For example, the existence of a luminiferous aether (a medium through which light waves were posited to
travel) was widely accepted in 19th century physics despite the lack of supporting evidence. It was only the
experiments of Michelson and Morley in 1887 and Einstein’s theory of special relativity in 1905 that forced
the scientific community to abandon these ideas.
Despite many such historical examples of poor individual judgement, science has generally progressed over
time. Physics, for example, has produced quantum mechanics, general relativity, the standard model of
particle physics and a huge number of associated technological and scientific breakthroughs. This is because
iteration has often corrected errors of judgement: multiple hypotheses were made, built upon, invalidated
and then revised.
The effectiveness of this error-correction mechanism varies by domain: it works well in fields where hypotheses
are easy to test, such as physics. However, in fields where hypotheses are hard to verify with high confidence,
such as psychology, it is less effective (Open Science Collaboration, 2015; Kahneman and Klein, 2009).
Furthermore, error-correction through iteration does not ensure that a field continually progresses; the overall
credibility of a field can fluctuate over time (Ioannidis, 2012). This is also true for alignment: At any given
moment the body of alignment research could contain mostly correct or mostly incorrect research and
we may be unable to distinguish between the two.
Unfortunately, alignment lacks the safe feedback loops that are required for error-correction to work (Griffin,
2026): Producing an overly optimistic OSA could result in the deployment of a misaligned AI before the error
is caught. This means alignment cannot rely on iteration to correct errors of judgement and we therefore need
reliable methods for training agents to perform well on hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks. Despite considerable
effort, there has been minimal progress on this so far (Leike, 2025).
Alignment research tasks are also likely to become even harder to supervise over time. As agents become
more capable they are able to produce more complex outputs (for example, by designing more elaborate
experiments) that become increasingly difficult to evaluate. The space of possible misaligned strategies also
grows as capabilities improve. This increases both the number of alignment properties that must be tested for
and the difficulty of identifying and preventing them. For example, a sufficiently advanced misaligned model
may pursue strategies such as gradient hacking (Hubinger, 2019) and these strategies could be harder to
detect.
3.3
Hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks lead to undetected errors
We have argued that the formation of OSAs involves hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks. These tasks can be
performed by human researchers or AI agents trained using human feedback. In either case, the fact that
these tasks are hard to supervise means that OSAs are likely to contain undetected systematic errors.
These errors can occur in two places in the research pipeline:
Output-level failures: Agents produce incorrect research outputs when completing hard-to-supervise fuzzy
tasks.
Aggregation-level failures: Even when individual research outputs are correct up to their stated uncertainty,
these uncertainties will be correlated. Mis-modelling this correlation structure when aggregating research
outputs into OSAs leads to incorrect conclusions.
3.3.1
Output-level failures
Because features of the training process make agent-generated errors particularly hard to spot, and because
automation is likely to amplify errors across many outputs, we should expect automated alignment research
to contain more undetected systematic errors than the human baseline.
We expect the training process to make agent-generated errors particularly hard to spot compared to human-
generated errors. This is for three reasons:
• Alien mistakes: Agent behaviour differs from human behaviour on equivalent tasks because their
cognitive architecture is fundamentally different. As a result, they are likely to produce errors that do
not resemble human errors, which reviewers may struggle to identify. For example, a research agent
might name a scheming evaluation scheming_test.py, leaking details of the evaluation to the model
being tested, something a human researcher is unlikely to do. Less obviously, since models can detect
authorship from subtle clues (a phenomenon sometimes referred to as "true sight" (Panickssery et al.,
2024)) this kind of leakage can occur through channels a human reviewer would not check.
• Optimisation pressure: Training on human feedback optimises AI-generated research to appear
correct to human judges. On hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks, human feedback does not necessarily
indicate correctness. Any errors will resemble those that humans do not spot.
• Non-human-evaluable arguments: Alignment solutions for ASI may rely on arguments that humans
are unable to follow, making errors impossible to identify.
In addition, pressure to quickly review large quantities of AI-generated work is likely to make human reviewers
even less likely to catch mistakes (Goddard et al., 2012). Human errors in steering or reviewing research
are also amplified by automation: the productivity of each human researcher is increased and so any human
mistakes are propagated across many outputs.
Agent-generated errors are also amplified when agents begin to both define and optimise against alignment
metrics. Currently human researchers generate alignment metrics (for example the "performance gap
recovered (PGR)" used in Anthropic’s weak-to-strong research (Burns et al., 2023)) and agents optimise
against them (Wen et al., 2026). At some point, however, research agents will produce their own alignment
metrics. Like other AI-generated outputs, these metrics are more likely to contain hard-to-spot flaws than
human-generated alternatives. These flaws are then propagated across all subsequent research that optimises
against the agent-proposed metric.
3.3.2
Aggregation-level failures
There will always exist uncertainty about how correct a given research paper is. This uncertainty is necessarily
correlated between different papers6. Mis-modelling this correlation structure can lead to undetected errors
when aggregating research outputs into OSAs and subsequent alignment failures, even when individual
research outputs are correct.
For example, imagine that Agent N has produced ten research papers, each providing evidence that Agent
N+1 is not scheming. Treated as independent evidence these papers indicate that the likelihood that Agent
N+1 is scheming is low. If, however, these papers share an unknown correlation (perhaps they all assume that
the persona selection model (Marks et al., 2026) is the correct framework for understanding agent behaviour)
the true probability of scheming is much higher. Failing to account for this would result in overconfident
OSAs.
There are three sources of correlated uncertainty:
• Agents: Shared weights, architectures, training data, and optimisation pressure from the training
process (for example, agents trained against the same reward model inherit its systematic biases).
• Human reviewers: Shared systematic biases across human reviewers.
• The research process: Shared assumptions, methodologies and conceptual frameworks.
Some of these correlations are easy to identify (e.g. two papers that use the same interpretability technique)
but others will be unknown. The correlation structure can be complex: dependencies between groups of
research papers can exist even when there are no pairwise correlations. The correlation structure can also
change suddenly. For example, if Agent N+1 learns to gradient hack, papers whose conclusions relied on this
6This problem of correlated uncertainty was discussed in learning the prior (Christiano, 2020) and learning the smooth
prior (Irving et al., 2022).
being out of scope now fail together, and an aggregation process that treats them as independent will produce
overconfident OSAs.
The severity of this problem depends on the volume of evidence that must be combined to form an OSA.
There are two extremes: at one end a single experiment clearly proves or disproves that Agent N+1 is not
scheming; at the other, all pieces of evidence must be considered holistically. The fewer pieces of evidence
required, the simpler the correlation structure and the easier the aggregation process. One might therefore
attempt to sidestep the problem of correlated uncertainty by using an agent to select a small sample of key
research papers to be combined into an OSA. Unfortunately, this trades off the difficulty in aggregating many
correlated outputs for trust in the agent’s judgement about which papers are most important.
This problem is not unique to alignment research. Both forecasting and safety case generation require
aggregating correlated judgements. Techniques from these fields may be helpful in solving aggregation-level
errors in alignment research. For example, state-of-the-art safety case methodology proposed using Bayesian
Belief Networks to map correlation structures in evidence (Bloomfield and Rushby, 2020).
Undetected errors could be hard to prevent
There are two approaches to training an agent to perform hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks:
• Trust generalisation from an easier-to-supervise training proxy: There may be easy-to-supervise
tasks where performance reliably transfers to hard-to-supervise fuzzy research tasks. For example,
training models to predict experimental results in alignment might generalise to predicting if the
model will scheme during deployment.
• Use a scalable oversight protocol: It may be possible to decompose hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks
into easier-to-supervise subtasks. For example, AI debate might make it possible to identify if an
output is flawed by evaluating a single load-bearing node in a debate between two agents.
We discuss these approaches in sections 4.1 and 4.2 respectively.
4.1
Generalisation
One approach for training agents to perform hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks is to train on related tasks that
are easier to supervise and hope that performance on those tasks generalises. If generalisation behaviour is
predictable, this removes the need to evaluate agent performance on the hard-to-supervise tasks.
It is sometimes suggested that continued RL training on a broadening set of (largely verifiable) tasks will yield
generalisation to other domains, including hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks (Amodei and Patel, 2026). Indeed,
models already perform well on some fuzzy tasks, such as writing. In reality, writing is an example of an
easy-to-supervise fuzzy task where humans can provide a reliable training signal. Agent performance on such
tasks is therefore better explained by RL training on tasks with similar distributions using human feedback or
AI self-critique. Since human feedback is an unreliable training signal for hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks, it is
unlikely that this method will work for such tasks.
Instead, one might try to generalise from easier-to-supervise training proxies. We define a true task and
training proxy pair as follows:
True task: The task that the agent is intended to perform. Example: Design an experiment that reveals
whether a model is behaving honestly.
Training proxy: A related task that is easier to train for than the true task. Example: Predict outcomes of
existing honesty evaluations.
One might expect performance on the training proxy to generalise to the true task. In the example above,
because the two tasks appear similar (both involve predicting similar model behaviours) and because in
learning the training proxy, the model may have developed a detailed understanding of what drives model
behaviour.
However, the training proxy only provides information about how a model behaves in the setting of the
evaluation. If your evaluations do not reliably measure honesty, training may not be effective. In other words,
the training proxy is no better than your alignment evaluations. The broader epistemic problem is that you
cannot directly measure generalisation if you cannot evaluate performance on the true task.
There is an additional generalisation challenge beyond performance on the training proxy reliably transferring
to performance on the true task. Performance on both tasks must also be maintained across the distribution
shift from training to deployment7. However, we consider this less concerning as there are promising
techniques for maintaining performance across distribution shifts, for example online learning (which reduces
the training to deployment gap by continuing to train on deployment data).
There are two approaches to solving the problem of validating training proxies:
1. Develop a detailed theoretical and empirical understanding of how generalisation works, in order to
reliably predict generalisation from training proxies, removing the need to evaluate performance on
the true hard-to-supervise task. (Carlsmith, 2025)
2. Improve our ability to evaluate performance on the true hard-to-supervise task, thereby making it
possible to validate the training proxy. One approach is scalable oversight, discussed in the next
section.
4.2
Scalable oversight
Another approach for training agents to perform hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks is to directly improve the
training signal on these tasks. This can be done by directly improving the quality of human judgement. For
example, by carefully selecting and training judges, designing interfaces that make review easier (e.g. by
requiring agents to point to important decision points) or adopting processes that use structured deliberation
or adversarial review such as the Delphi method (Dalkey and Helmer, 1962). However, these are likely to be
insufficient, as human judgement is fundamentally limited. Instead, more sophisticated scalable oversight
protocols may be required.
For example, a scalable oversight protocol could be used to decompose hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks into
subtasks which are easier to evaluate. Humans could then check the easier subtasks and these judgments
could be propagated up to the main task. Such a scalable oversight protocol could be used to directly train an
agent to perform a hard-to-supervise fuzzy task, or to determine whether an agent has generalised successfully
from a training proxy8.
There are many scalable oversight proposals, for example recursive reward modelling (Leike et al., 2018),
debate (Irving et al., 2018), and iterated amplification and distillation (Christiano et al., 2018). Unfortunately,
it is unclear if these proposals work for the type of hard-to-supervise fuzzy research tasks we are concerned
with. There are two reasons for this: (1) subtasks will still require judgement; and (2) existing protocols are
unable to recombine correlated, probabilistic subtasks.
7Strictly, the case that training on a proxy task generalises rests on three claims: 1. The training proxy and true tasks
are tightly coupled (i.e. performance on the training proxy reliably indicates performance on the true task); 2. The
training proxy and true tasks remain tightly coupled across the distribution shift from training to deployment; and 3. The
performance (on either task) generalises across the distribution shift from training to deployment. We group claims 2 and
3, as both are concerned with robustness to distribution shift.
8A training proxy is not strictly necessary if a scalable oversight protocol exists. However, in practice it may be more
efficient to use a training proxy and verify that performance generalises using the scalable oversight protocol than to
directly train on the signal from the scalable oversight protocol.
4.2.1
Judgement
Most existing scalable oversight protocols involve decomposing hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks into subtasks.
However, some of these subtasks will themselves be fuzzy and therefore require judgement. For example,
one subtask of forming an OSA might be: How relevant is experiment E (that uses model organism M) for
determining if Agent N+1 is scheming? A human judge has to decide how important evidence from the
experiment is. Misjudging the importance of the experiment could invalidate any OSA that cites it as evidence.
Current scalable oversight protocols assume that a single human can provide a clear and correct judgement for
each subtask (Irving et al., 2018; Christiano et al., 2018; Leike et al., 2018). In reality, for hard-to-supervise
fuzzy tasks some subtasks are likely to remain difficult judgement problems where human experts disagree
(Fig. 4a). Decomposition is still useful, however, as long as each subtask is easier for humans to correctly
judge than the main task. The degree to which this holds for alignment-relevant hard-to-supervise fuzzy
research tasks is an open question.
Figure 4(a): A scalable oversight protocol decomposes a
hard-to-supervise fuzzy research task into easier subtasks.
Some of these subtasks will themselves be fuzzy tasks
(yellow clouds) and some will be non-fuzzy tasks that are
easy to evaluate (green circles). If the fuzzy subtasks are
easier to evaluate than the original task then the scalable
oversight protocol is useful.
Figure 4(b): An overall safety assessment supported by
four correlated research outputs (orange circles). The red
lines indicate correlated uncertainty between research out-
puts. This correlated uncertainty makes combining judge-
ments from each research output into an overall safety
assessment difficult. Incorrectly assuming independence
between research outputs produces an overconfident OSA
which could lead to alignment failures.
4.2.2
Correlated uncertainty makes scalable oversight for OSAs harder
Existing scalable oversight protocols do not satisfactorily deal with correlated uncertainty (Sec. 3.3.2)
when recombining subtasks and are therefore not appropriate for evaluating OSAs. In most protocols, the
recombination of subtasks is straightforward (debate, for instance, decomposes a claim into a deductive
argument (Irving et al., 2018)). For OSAs, however, correctly combining subtasks is more difficult: The output
of each subtask is a probability estimate (e.g. the probability that Agent N+1 responds honestly to queries of
a certain type given a particular research output) and subtasks have a complicated correlation structure. A
scalable oversight protocol for OSAs must therefore accurately model this correlation structure in order to
correctly recombine subtasks (Fig. 4b).
5
Conclusion and future research
Even if agents are not scheming to sabotage alignment research they are likely to produce research that looks
compelling but in fact contains undetected, systematic errors. These errors can occur in individual outputs or
their aggregation into OSAs. We should expect these errors to be harder to identify, and more numerous, than
in human-generated alignment research. In this scenario, research could survive extensive human checks and
strongly indicate that a next-generation model is safe to deploy but in fact be catastrophically wrong.
To prevent this, agents must reliably perform well on the hard-to-supervise fuzzy research tasks that are
pervasive in alignment (such as making correct inferences about alignment from research outputs that target
alignment proxies, or compiling OSAs from bodies of correlated evidence). This is because we cannot rely on
iteration to resolve errors. The leading methods for training agents on hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks have
unresolved open problems. These are:
Generalisation: This technique relies on generalisation from easier training proxies to hard-to-supervise
fuzzy tasks. Validating training proxies, however, requires generalisation behaviour to be predictable or
performance on the hard-to-supervise fuzzy task to be evaluable.
Scalable oversight: This technique enables performance on hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks to be evaluated
by decomposing the tasks into easier-to-evaluate subtasks. It does not, however, completely remove the
requirement for humans to make fuzzy judgement calls (although the hope is that remaining judgement calls
will be easier). Existing protocols assume that recombining subtasks is straightforward. In reality, for OSAs,
subtasks are likely to be highly correlated, making recombination challenging.
At the moment, we can only reliably test our alignment solutions on weaker-than-human models, where the
alignment risk is low and we are able to judge the effectiveness of our techniques (misalignment in current
models is often easy to catch as they often verbalise intent in chain of thought or take obviously deceptive
actions). These techniques may not scale beyond human level and so we must find methods for evaluating
the effectiveness of alignment solutions for superhuman models.
We see several avenues for further research, which we outline below. Most of these research projects require a
proxy for a hard-to-supervise fuzzy task where the ground truth is known. Two options for proxies are:
1. Relative hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks: Tasks that are easy to supervise for a domain expert but
hard to supervise for a non-expert. Expert evaluation provides a ground truth and we can test uplift
of non-experts due to different scalable oversight protocols.
2. Completed research results: Completed research problems that are beyond an agent’s knowledge
cutoff contain examples of hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks with known solutions.
In addition to making progress on generalisation and scalable oversight, another possible research direction
is to develop better ways of measuring agent performance on hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks. Below is a
non-comprehensive list of follow-up research ideas within each of these three areas.
Measuring agent capabilities
1. Recreate completed research projects. Take logs from completed research projects (intermediate
documents, research meeting notes, code etc.) and measure agent ability to continue with the
research project against the human baseline.
2. Test agent prediction performance over datasets of correlated-events. This directly tests whether
agents are able to correctly combine correlated subtasks.
3. Empirical studies of optimal human-agent team structure. Use non-experts to solve completed
research problems beyond the model’s knowledge cutoff with agent assistance. Vary team structure
and review methods. Measure the effectiveness of different structures at reproducing correct results.
Generalisation
1. Simulated generalisation experiments where different training proxies are tested using agent
performance on completed research problems from beyond the knowledge cutoff of models. This
could be done with weaker models with earlier knowledge cutoffs (increasing the number of available
completed research results).
2. Mechanistic understanding of generalisation via whitebox methods, for example in mechanistic
interpretability or learning theory.
Scalable oversight
1. Compactification of research paper corpora. An alternative to producing OSAs by aggregating
results from a large body of research is to have an agent periodically produce a small number of
completely new research outputs designed to capture the information that was learned and be
maximally informative (a compactification of a research corpus). A compactification would be scored
on a separate agent’s ability to predict conclusions from the original research corpus using just the
compactification. This metric could be optimised in training to produce better compactifications.
This process would result in a small sample of maximally informative research outputs that human
reviewers could more easily check and remain abreast of research developments. It also reduces the
problem of correlated uncertainty by decreasing the number of research outputs required for an OSA.
2. Develop and test new scalable oversight protocols that deal with correlated uncertainty when
recombining subtasks. Test uplift of non-experts on relative hard-to-supervise fuzzy tasks with
complicated correlation structure and compare to existing protocols.
3. Test different human scaffolds for uplifting non-expert performance on relative hard-to-supervise
fuzzy tasks.
4. Red team automated alignment programs. The red team prompts an agent to hide errors in a
research paper corpus and the blue team attempts to catch these errors with agent assistance. This
project would catalogue the type and severity of errors that evade detection and the effectiveness of
different review processes.
Successfully resolving the open problems we identify in this paper would increase the likelihood that
automated alignment programs are able to provide effective and trustworthy alignment solutions.
References
Dario Amodei and Dwarkesh Patel. Dario Amodei - "We are near the end of the exponential". https:
//www.dwarkesh.com/p/dario-amodei-2, February 2026. Dwarkesh Podcast. Accessed: 2026-06-05.
Anthropic.
Claude
opus
4.6
system
card.

0dd865075ad3132672ee0ab40b05a53f14cf5288.pdf, February 2026.
See §8.3.1 "Internal model
use survey" for the staff survey discussed.
Anthropic Alignment Science Team. Petri: An open-source auditing tool to accelerate AI safety research.
 October 2025.
Robin Bloomfield and John Rushby. Assurance 2.0: A manifesto. 2020. URL 
10474.
Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner, Yining
Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, Ilya Sutskever, and Jeff Wu. Weak-to-strong generalization:
Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision. 2023. URL 
Joe Carlsmith. Can we safely automate alignment research?

can-we-safely-automate-alignment-research, April 2025. Essay in the series "How do we solve the
alignment problem?".
Paul Christiano.
Learning the prior.

learning-the-prior, 2020.
Paul Christiano, Buck Shlegeris, and Dario Amodei. Supervising strong learners by amplifying weak experts.
2018. URL 
Joshua Clymer.
How might we safely pass the buck to AI?

TTFsKxQThrqgWeXYJ/how-might-we-safely-pass-the-buck-to-ai, February 2025.
Norman Dalkey and Olaf Helmer. An experimental application of the Delphi method to the use of experts. Re-
search Memorandum RM-727/1, RAND Corporation, 1962. URL 
memoranda/RM727z1.html.
Johannes Gasteiger, Vladimir Mikulik, Ethan Perez, Fabien Roger, Misha Wagner, Akbir Khan, Sam Bowman,
and Jan Leike. Automated researchers can subtly sandbag. 
automated-researchers-sandbag/, 2025. Anthropic Alignment Science Blog.
Kate Goddard, Abdul Roudsari, and Jeremy C Wyatt. Automation bias: a systematic review of frequency,
effect mediators, and mitigators. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2012. doi:
10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000089. URL 
Ryan Greenblatt, Buck Shlegeris, Kshitij Sachan, and Fabien Roger. AI control: Improving safety despite
intentional subversion. 2023. URL 
Charlie Griffin. Automating alignment may be harder than automating capabilities, because of "unsafe to verify"
tasks. 
April 2026. AI Alignment Forum / LessWrong shortform entry.
Evan
Hubinger.
Gradient
hacking.

gradient-hacking, October 2019. LessWrong post; canonical coinage of the term "gradient hacking".
John P. A. Ioannidis. Why science is not necessarily self-correcting. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 2012.
doi: 10.1177/1745691612464056. URL 
Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei. AI safety via debate. 2018. URL 
abs/1805.00899.
Geoffrey Irving, Rohin Shah, and Evan Hubinger. Learning the smooth prior. 
org/posts/9x5mtYjHYfr4T7KLj/learning-the-smooth-prior, April 2022.
Daniel Kahneman and Gary Klein. Conditions for intuitive expertise: A failure to disagree. American
Psychologist, 64(6):515-526, 2009. doi: 10.1037/a0016755.
Jan Leike. A minimal viable product for alignment. 
March 2022.
Jan Leike. Crisp and fuzzy tasks.  November
2024.
Jan Leike. Alignment is not solved, but is increasingly looking solvable. 
alignment-is-not-solved-but-increasingly-looks-solvable, 2025.
Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable agent alignment
via reward modeling: a research direction. 2018. URL 
David Manheim and Scott Garrabrant. Categorizing variants of Goodhart’s law, 2018. URL 
org/abs/1803.04585.
Samuel Marks, Christopher Olah, Stuart Ritchie, and Ethan Perez. The persona selection model: Why AI
assistants might behave like humans.  2026.
Alexander Meinke, Bronson Schoen, Jérémy Scheurer, Mikita Balesni, Rusheb Shah, and Marius Hobbhahn.
Frontier models are capable of in-context scheming, 2025. URL 
Open Science Collaboration. Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science, 349(6251):
aac4716, 2015. doi: 10.1126/science.aac4716. URL 
Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R. Bowman, and Shi Feng.
LLM evaluators recognize and favor their own
generations. 2024. URL 
Jiaxin Wen, Liang Qiu, Joe Benton, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, and Jan Leike.
Automated weak-to-strong
researcher.  2026. Anthropic
Alignment Science Blog.