MORE THAN CAN BE SAID: A BENCHMARK AND FRAMEWORK
FOR PRE-QUESTION SCIENTIFIC IDEATION
Jie Yu
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
East China Normal University
Shanghai, 200241
71285904004@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
Song Qiu
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
East China Normal University
Shanghai, 200241
sqiu@ee.ecnu.edu.cn
May 8, 2026
ABSTRACT
AI research agents have shown strong potential in automating literature search and manuscript
refinement, yet most assume a clear and actionable initial input, operating only after a research
question has been made explicit. In contrast, human research often begins with tacit friction, a
sense of misalignment before a question can be formed. We introduce InciteResearch, a multi-
agent framework designed to make a researcher’s implicit understanding explicit, inspectable, and
actionable. InciteResearch decomposes the logical chain of Socratic questioning and distributes
it across the entire pipeline that: (1) Elicits a structured five-dimensional researcher profile state
anchored by specific friction points from vague, even domain-unrelated inputs; (2) Violates hidden
assumptions by maximizing the feasibility-novelty product with enforcing a 7-stage causal derivation
trace; and (3) check whether the proposed method is a Necessary consequence of the reframed insight.
We further introduce TF-Bench, the first benchmark for tacit-to-explicit research assistance that
distinguishes domain-related from domain-unrelated inspirations across four scientific modes. On
TF-Bench, InciteResearch achieves leapfrogging gains over a prompt-based baseline (novelty/impact
from 3.671/3.806 to 4.250/4.397), shifting generated proposals from recombination to architectural
insight. Our work demonstrates that AI can serve as an extension of thinking itself, rather than merely
automating downstream execution. Code is available at 
InciteResearch.git.
Introduction
The feasibility of AI-driven research automation has long been a subject of active debate (Field et al., 2026; Reddy
and Shojaee, 2025). As large language models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable potential in logical reasoning and
hypothesis construction (Alkan et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025a; Schmidgall et al., 2025), the field has witnessed a
pronounced divergence of views regarding their fundamental nature. Whether these models possess genuine capacity
for discovery (Pandey et al., 2026; Beel et al., 2025) or engage in sophisticated pattern matching within the boundaries
of existing knowledge remains an open question (Gupta and Pruthi, 2025; Georgiou, 2025; Field et al., 2026). A
more productive framing may be to move beyond evaluating large language models in isolation and instead consider
them as extensions of human researchers’ thinking. Human research is driven by affect, intuition, frustration, and
moments of insight (Chiriatti et al., 2025; Kapusta, 2025), whereas large language models are data-driven (Alkan et al.,
2025; Li et al., 2025b; Pandey et al., 2026), with strengths in systematic pattern induction and structured reasoning.
arXiv:2605.06345v1 [cs.AI] 7 May 2026

A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Elicit & Direction
Human ⇆ AI
Reframe & Execution
AI (as Human Extension)
Reflect & Correction
AI ⇆ Human
Vague
Inspiration
Human
Human keeps looping:
AI extension → reflect →refine →iterate
Research
Proposal
Figure 1: In this paradigm of scientific exploration, the process begins with casual human conversation, in which humans
steer the direction while AI broadens the space of thought through assumption breaking as an extension of human
cognition. Humans then correct the direction through reflection, while AI provides additional directional suggestions.
Under this collaborative condition, the process iterates until the vague human inspiration is made explicit as a research
proposal.
The intersection of this determinacy and indeterminacy (Chiriatti et al., 2025; Pandey et al., 2026), the convergence
of data-driven precision with affect-driven openness, inevitably gives rise to a new form of cognitive collaboration
(Kapusta, 2025) whose potential far exceeds what any purely automation-centric narrative can accommodate.
In scientific practice, progress often originates in anomaly, frustration, or a mismatch between intuition and existing
abstraction, not in a clearly stated problem, but in a tacit sense that something is off (Reddy and Shojaee, 2025; Kuhn,
1962). Recent research agents have accelerated literature search (Nogueira et al., 2026), synthesis (Schmidgall et al.,
2025), and drafting (Li et al., 2025b), but they typically begin operating after the research question has already been
made explicit (Wu et al., 2026; Baek et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025), assuming that the user can already articulate the
task, decompose the objective and supply the relevant constraints in a directly actionable form. The model is then cast
as an executor, a search assistant, or a summarizer over an already legible problem space, rather than as an amplifier of
human intelligence capable of participating in the cognitive origin of research.
If the user input is a tacit sense of dissatisfaction rather than an explicit specification, we must first elicit and make
explicit the latent distinctions in the intuition of the user (Chiriatti et al., 2025; Schön, 1983). If the goal is genuine
originality rather than recombination within the existing framework, the problem must be reframed by identifying
and violating assumptions (Alkan et al., 2025; Pandey et al., 2026; Kuhn, 1962). It should be noted that violating
assumptions here does not require AI to genuinely break assumptions on its own; rather, it designates violation of
assumptions as a necessary choice in the process of assisting human research thinking, as is shown in Figure 1. If the
output is to be a research method rather than a plausible-sounding suggestion, each method component must be verified
as entailed by the insight rather than appended post hoc (Schmidgall et al., 2025; Schön, 1983). Accordingly, these
requirements give rise to three corresponding operators: E for eliciting and making explicit latent intuitions, V for
assumption violation and problem reframing, and N for necessity checking.
We present an agent driven by a cognitive state-machine based on Assumption-Breaking Hypothesis Generation (ABHG)
named InciteResearch, which treats the model not as a source of ideas ex nihilo but as an instrument for making a
researcher’s implicit understanding explicit, inspectable, and ultimately actionable. The output proposal is therefore not
an alien invention imposed from outside, but a clarified form of what the researcher may already know tacitly. The
deeper conviction of this project is that the advancement of AI capability will not take the form of AI replacing intuition,
but of AI extending intuition, endowing human intuition with leverage, articulation, and reach.
We construct TF-Bench, the one of the first benchmark designed specifically for tacit-to-explicit research assistance.
Existing datasets cannot be directly applied to this setting because they typically presuppose that the input is already an
actionable research question rather than an inchoate intuition fragment (Wu et al., 2026; Schmidgall et al., 2025; Beel
et al., 2025). TF-Bench examines the structured capacity of research assistants before a problem has taken shape by
distinguishing two ambiguity types, domain-related and domain-unrelated, and conducts evaluation across four scientific
modes, prediction, discovery, attribution, and causality, ensuring coverage of the core cognitive tasks of empirical
science rather than merely achieving surface-level domain diversity. We systematically evaluate InciteResearch on
TF-Bench, reporting overall performance, qualitative analysis and ablation studies. The results show substantial gains in
novelty and impact over direct prompting baselines, from 3.671 / 3.806 to 4.250 / 4.397 over direct prompting baselines,
and the ablation studies further reveal the functional indispensability of each individual operator.
Related Works
An increasing number of studies frame scientific idea generation as an end-to-end automated problem. The AI Scientist
(Lu et al., 2024) represents one of the most complete attempts to date to realize a fully closed-loop path from task
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Semantic Alignment
Maximum amount
of user information
What if we were to
apply EVN
methodology to
explore the
evolution of the
system itself?
User Expression
Alignment
extract
structure
Multi-round Socratic Dialogue
User Expression
I suddenly thought
that linguistic limits
and multimodal
complexity
eventually distill
into simpler forms.
Until clear friction
point is uncovered
Triage
Deepening
Researcher Profile
Friction
Points
Research
Motivation
Research
Taste
Constraints
Refined
Topic
Socratic Elicitation
E
Assumption Breaking & Reframing
Assumptions
⋅ Problem Exogeneity
⋅ Tacit Knowledge
   Captureability
⋅ Single-Level
   Execution
⋅ External Necessity
   Arbiter
⋅ ...
Considering
Feasibility
Considering
Novelty
Reframing
Broken
Assumptions
Logical
Rationale
Reframed
Problem
Candidate Directions
...
...
Topic
Anchor
Derivation Trace
Problem
Directions 1, 2, ...
select
Broken
Assumption
Insight
Claim
Predictions
Constraints
Method
V
Validity & Problem Reframing
A single agent cannot externalize its own
operator priors - the scanning lens
cannot scan itself. Two agents in a
reflective loop is the minimum
architecture that makes operator-level
tacit knowledge a first-class research
object, not an engineering footnote.
Necessity
Sufficiency
The mirror loop generates finite, open-
ended levels - each level's unresolvable
failure pattern becomes the next level's
research input. Termination is determined
by the absence of structured failures, not
by a fixed recursion limit. Threshold for
"structured" remains unspecified.
Counterexample
Constitutional AI and Self-Refine
demonstrate that one LLM can critique
and revise its own outputs across multiple
turns, including reasoning about its own
reasoning strategy. If that constitutes
"operator rewriting," the dual-agent
architecture adds complexity without
necessity.
N
Necessity Checking
Vague Inspiration Inputs
Outputs
Research Proposal
Problem
EVN operators fail when EVN itself
is the research target.
Broken Assumption
EVN operates not only on external
tasks but also on self-referential ones.
Insight
Two vocabulary-isolated agents form a
self-sustaining methodological engine.
Claim
Given structured failure patterns, self-
referential EVN produces operator
rewriting, not infinite regression.
Relevant Code
Repository
6
Core Algorithm
Method Overview
Necessity Test
Figure 2: Overview of InciteResearch. InciteResearch transforms vague inspiration into a structured research proposal
through the EVN framework. Italicized text denotes a self-referential research proposal generated by InciteResearch.
In the current implementation, N mainly acts as a post hoc structural verifier rather than a fully revision-integrated
controller, kept lightweight intentionally to validate the core effectiveness of EVN without requiring continuous human
intervention at intermediate nodes.
specification to paper output without human intervention. SciMON (Wang et al., 2024) takes user-provided descriptions
of concrete problems, research goals and experimental constraints as input, retrieves inspirations from existing papers,
and generates novel research directions. Scideator (Radensky et al., 2024) takes a set of related scientific papers as
input, extracts key dimensions such as purpose, mechanism and evaluation, allows users to synthesize new ideas by
recombining dimensions, and automates novelty evaluation. ResearchAgent (Baek et al., 2025) takes a core paper as
input, augments it with related literature and a knowledge base, and then deploys multiple reviewing agents for iterative
peer-review-style refinement. Agent Laboratory (Schmidgall et al., 2025) starts from an explicit research idea and
then sequentially completes literature review, experimental design and paper writing. Yet they all assume a clear and
actionable initial input, and on this basis improve idea-generation strategies that are highly dependent on that premise.
On this basis, a number of works have tried to improve the research ideation process from different angles. Some focus
on novelty boosting (Alkan et al., 2025), such as SciMON, which introduces multiple retrievals and iterative comparison
to improve the distinctiveness of ideas (Wang et al., 2024). Some focus on structured reasoning (Alkan et al., 2025),
such as MotivGraph-SoIQ (Lei et al., 2025), which combines a motivational knowledge graph with question-driven
Socratic inquiry to strengthen ideation quality. Other work introduces self-critique and structured scientific hypothesis
revision (Liu et al., 2026). There are also works from the tool and evaluation side, such as DeepResearch-9K (Wu et al.,
2026), which points out the two bottlenecks faced by current deep-research agents, namely the lack of datasets and the
lack of trainable frameworks, and provides the corresponding benchmark and training tools. However, these methods
still optimize within a given problem frame rather than making the frame itself explicit and breaking it.
Therefore, we argue that the legitimacy of a research problem does not come from its correspondence to gaps in the
existing literature, but rather from reflection on the conceptual frame that constitutes the problem, namely Assumption-
Breaking Hypothesis Generation (ABHG). Our approach borrows from the Socratic questioning chain, which moves
from definition, presupposition, evidence and perspective, and refutation/elenchus, to aporia, then refutation, redefinition,
and meta-questioning (Lu and Hu, 2025; Ho et al., 2023; L’Arrivee, 2020). We then distribute this chain across a
multi-stage agent pipeline, named cognitive state-machine.
Methodology
As is shown in Figure 2, we adopt a cognitive state-machine driven framework to map vague initial research feelings
into structured and logically self-consistent research plans. It is formalized into three core stages, namely Socratic
Elicitation, Validity and Problem Reframing, and Necessity Checking, i.e., the EVN framework, which decomposes the
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
traditional Socratic questioning chain and distributes it across the entire multi-agent pipeline, while also supporting
domain-unrelated inputs, including vague problems or irrelevant statements.
In the ideal sense, a system that truly treats language models as a cognitive extension of human researchers should
manifest as an open-ended interactive process, in which the human provides vague inspiration, the system externalizes
it and reflects it back through assumption violation, then the system proceeds through necessity checking, and the
human further intervenes on this basis, repeating this process in a loop and continuously expanding the reach of human
intuition while satisfying the EVN structure. The current implementation constitutes the first step toward this direction.
In the E stage, InciteResearch completes the externalization of inspiration through two rounds of structured interaction;
then the V and N operators are executed sequentially and the result is directly presented as an actionable research
proposal. This design is intentionally kept lightweight, with the aim of validating the core effectiveness of EVN without
requiring continuous human intervention at intermediate nodes.
3.1
Socratic Elicitation (E)
This module aims to externalize the user’s tacit intuition into a structured research profile through multiple rounds of
human-machine dialogue. Specifically, the state machine selects the next prompting question according to the currently
collected information and user feedback until a clear friction point is identified.
First, we perform semantic alignment on an arbitrary initial input t0 ∈Itacit, extract the potential domain signal and
conflict signal contained in it, and generate the first anchoring question q1 to locate the most central domain friction
point in the user’s intuition. For example, given a user expression such as "What if we were to apply EVN methodology
to explore the evolution of the system itself?", the semantic alignment extracts the structural intent by strictly following
the prompt constraint "Ask concrete, friction-inducing questions. Do not ask abstract questions like ’what is your
insight?’. The question must be concrete enough to immediately recall a specific paper or class of methods." The goal
of generating q1 is to maximize the amount of user information obtained in the subsequent dialogue, that is, to select
the question that maximally reduces the expected uncertainty of the researcher profile.
During the multi-round Socratic dialogue, InciteResearch processes subsequent inputs using a dynamic triage and
deepening strategy. When encountering a user expression like "I suddenly thought that linguistic limits and multimodal
complexity eventually distill into simpler forms", InciteResearch performs triage to evaluate the information density.
If the response contains concrete friction points, the system executes deepening to probe the underlying causes; if
the response is vague, InciteResearch switches the analytical angle; if the response implies resource restrictions,
InciteResearch elicits formal boundary constraints.
Regarding the researcher profile, we represent the cognitive state in the research process as the vector Pprofile =
(f, m, c, r, t), corresponding to five core dimensions: Friction Points f, research motivation m, constraints c, research
taste r, and refined topic t. The data flow operates with the friction points serving as the central gravitational node. The
friction points point leftward to research motivation and research taste to answer why the problem matters and what
preference guides the solution. Simultaneously, the friction points point rightward to the refined topic and constraints to
define the actionable objective and its boundary conditions. Furthermore, research taste guides the research motivation,
while the refined topic is bounded by the constraints. This structured researcher profile replaces loose dialogue text and
transforms Itacit into a structured semantic prior Pprofile that can be parsed by subsequent operators.
Based on Pprofile and the related literature abstracts, we extract core concepts from the keyword set of the refined topic
t and construct the topic anchor set C = {c1, . . . , cm}. C is imposed as a hard constraint on the generation process
of candidate directions Dcand, preventing subsequent reasoning from drifting across domains by ensuring that any
generated direction failing to encompass these anchors is filtered out.
3.2
Validity and Problem Reframing (V)
Existing research often falls into the trap of making incremental improvements on the wrong problem. This module
aims to reflect on and reconstruct the premises of the current research direction, breaking the presuppositions of the
problem statement while opening up the solution space. Combined with the given Dcand, it outputs a specified number
of candidate research directions d∗through the hidden assumptions mined below.
Using the pattern of the current state Pprofile, InciteResearch extracts the dependent hidden assumption set from the
selected research direction:
Ahidden = {ah
1, ah
2, . . . , ah
n}.
Subsequently, for each candidate assumption ah
i , InciteResearch measures it from two independent dimensions,
feasibility ϕ(ah
i ) and novelty ν(ah
i ). Feasibility evaluates whether this assumption corresponds to an artificial constraint
that has an engineeringly feasible bypass path. Novelty evaluates whether breaking this assumption can open a solution
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
space that has not yet been explored in the existing literature. For instance, when evaluating assumptions such as "Tacit
Knowledge Captureability, Single-Level Execution, External Necessity Arbiter", InciteResearch identifies the one
whose absence creates the maximum paradigm shift rather than a delta improvement.
The condition for the final selected assumptions as the specified number of assumptions to be broken is:
a∗= arg
max
ah
i ∈Ahidden ϕ(ah
i ) · ν(ah
i )
Finally, InciteResearch formally outputs the triplet:
⟨a∗, R, d†⟩
where R (Breaking Rationale) is the logical rationale for breaking a∗, and d† (Problem Reframing) is the reconstructed
formulation of the original research direction d∗based on R. d† is not an incremental rewriting of d∗, but a re-anchoring
of the problem under a new coordinate system defined by the absence of a∗.
Finally, to ensure that the proposed method is a logical necessity rather than one of many feasible options, InciteResearch
uses the problem reframing result and the user motivation to construct a causal derivation trace. This derivation trace
acts as an anti-inversion mechanism by forcing the narrative through a strict causal sequence. It ensures that the problem
necessitates breaking the broken assumption, which yields a specific Insight; this Insight generates a falsifiable claim
that implies concrete predictions; these predictions dictate minimal method constraints, which inevitably produce the
final method. This narrative chain is forcibly constrained into seven stages:
⟨Problem, Broken Assumption, Insight, Claim, Predictions, Constraints, Method⟩
3.3
Necessity Checking (N)
The final module acts as a strict reviewer and reflector, performing comprehensive necessity checks on the generated
method and derivation trace to ensure that the research plan is highly self-consistent and falsifiable, and by injecting
this report as forced context into the final proposal assembly node, it forces the final output to correct logical loopholes.
Specifically, necessity check asks whether there exists a simpler alternative m′ than the current method ˆm, questioning
if the uniqueness of the method is merely a product of over-engineering rather than an inevitable derivation from the
insight. Sufficiency check asks whether the current component set of ˆm is sufficient to support its core claim, acting as
an anti-inversion check to identify floating components constructed post-hoc simply to justify the hypothesis without
being required by any prediction. Counterexample check actively searches for the failure modes of ˆm, constructing
extreme input scenarios that can violate its core assumptions or invalidate its verification scheme, thereby ensuring the
contribution cannot be dissolved by stacking scaled-up simple baselines.
Experimental Setup
4.1
TF-Bench
We construct TF-Bench because no existing public dataset directly matches the tacit-to-explicit research assistance
setting. To improve benchmark coverage and authenticity, we first used Grok 4.3 to generate examples, which human
annotators then refined through multiple interactive rounds per example. We partition the examples into two ambiguity
types: domain-related and domain-unrelated. The former comprises prompts that already carry scientific domain
signals yet remain under-specified; the latter comprises prompts that carry only weak metaphorical or conceptual cues.
Although a scientific domain is provided by TF-Bench for evaluation uniformity, the exploratory task itself remains
deliberately vague.
To ensure that TF-Bench covers the core empirical tasks of empirical science, we draw on classical dimensions of
scientific methodology (Voit, 2019; Witte and Zenker, 2017) and recent surveys of AI-driven scientific discovery (Zhou
et al., 2025), selecting four orthogonal modes, prediction, discovery, attribution, and causality, instantiated respectively
as multimodal medical prognosis prediction, computational genomics analysis of single-cell RNA-seq, attribution of
extreme weather events in climate models and causal brain-network modeling in neuroscience. Among them, each
domain consists of 10 pieces of domain-related inspiration and 3 pieces of domain-unrelated inspiration. Each piece of
inspiration is divided into 2 paragraphs.
Table 1 presents two representative examples from TF-Bench, illustrating the contrast between the two ambiguity types.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Table 1: Two representative examples from TF-Bench. Each example consists of two paragraphs: the first articulates a
perceived failure or friction and the second gestures toward a possible reframing. The domain-related example already
signals a scientific context; the domain-unrelated example supplies only a situational metaphor.
Domain
Type
Input Text
Multimodal
Learning for
Cancer Prognosis
Analysis
RELATED
Paragraph 1. The inductive bias of positional decay in Transformers seems to
cause problems for large models in the medical field.
Paragraph 2.
It suddenly occurred to me that when large models analyze
pathology, they tend to misjudge benign tissues as skin tumors because they
are memoryless greedy navigators and lack global context. Perhaps at the 15th
step, the context is already filled with a bunch of high-magnification images,
and the low-magnification global impression has been drowned out and diluted.
Would a hierarchical multi-centric design be better?
Attribution of
Extreme Weather
Events in Climate
Models
UNRELATED
Paragraph 1. The luggage wouldn’t fit at first, but after rearranging it, every-
thing went in. Actually, the things didn’t change.
Paragraph 2. Suddenly I feel, if just changing the arrangement changes the
result, is the problem not with the things themselves? If I handled things in a
different way, would it be much easier?
4.2
Evaluation Indicators
We adopt three core dimensions widely recognized in the field of creativity evaluation (Si et al., 2025; Saraogi et al.,
2026), namely novelty, feasibility and impact. The novelty metric follows the formulation of (Schopf and Färber,
2026), where scores of 3 and 4 represent a transition from "solving problems" to "defining problems." Feasibility
refers to technical feasibility, namely whether the core technical path can be realized under existing methods, data
and computational resources, rather than resource limitations or time cost (Saraogi et al., 2026). Impact refers to
the potential theoretical value and domain-transformative power of an idea from the perspective of depth, namely
whether it can promote fundamental theoretical breakthroughs, paradigm shifts or long-term scientific progress, rather
than only short-term citations or breadth of application (Si et al., 2025). The scoring adopts a five-point scale whose
details are elaborated in the appendix, where Gemini 3.1 Pro and GPT-5.2 score each proposal according to the scoring
standard from 1 to 5. The final value of each item is the average of the scores from the two reviewers. At the same
time, two professors from the corresponding domain independently conduct blind review on the proposals whose
domains correspond and whose order is shuffled under the same evaluation conditions. We also evaluate the statistical
consistency between the results of Gemini 3.1 Pro and GPT-5.2 and the human evaluation scores, by using Cohen’s
weighted kappa coefficient with quadratic weights (Li et al., 2023).
4.3
Implementation Details
All experiments use Claude 4.6 Sonnet as the base model across all agent nodes to ensure the consistency of reasoning
capability. To balance the trade-off between deterministic reasoning and creative generation, we tailor the sampling
temperature T for different operators in the EVN pipeline. For E, set to T = 0.7. In the stage of V, the temperature is
set to T = 0.6 . For problem reframing, it is slightly increased to T = 0.65. The derivation trace and necessity check
operators are strictly configured with lower temperatures, from T = 0.2 to T = 0.3. The final proposal generation
operates at T = 0.4. For the TF-Bench evaluation phase, the LLM-as-a-judge is executed with a deterministic setting
of T = 0.0 to guarantee strict reproducibility and stability of the scoring metrics.
Results
5.1
Qualitative Analysis
We first conduct a qualitative comparison between InciteResearch and prompt-based LLM proposal results under the
same human vague inspiration. For InciteResearch, the token usage is 4,471 input tokens, 43,547 output tokens, and
34,322 cache-creation input tokens. For the prompt-based LLM, the token usage is 1,573 input tokens and 4,371 output
tokens.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Table 2: The proposal contents generated by prompt-based LLM and InciteResearch based on the same human
inspiration. InciteResearch explores architectural evolution via failure-triggered bifurcation. Conversely, the Prompt-
based LLM performs linguistic compression. Practically, the proposal of InciteResearch builds the logical scaffolding
that the proposal of the LLMs populate.
Source
Content
Human Inspiration
Any system designed to navigate from "tacit friction" toward the eventual generation of "research
outcomes" must, at a minimum, incorporate three core operators: E (Externalization) to articulate the
subconscious, V (Violation) to break free from inherent assumptions, and N (Necessity) to reinforce
logical rigor. If we were to apply this specific methodology to explore the evolution of the agent itself,
what emergent properties or developmental shifts would we observe? This premise asserts that "truth
cannot be fully captured by language"-yet this statement itself, being a linguistic construct, fails to
fully capture the very truth it intends to convey. By the same token, humans require Research Agents to
acquire broader information through generalized multimodality; as the volume of information increases,
the resulting expression becomes increasingly simple.
Prompt-based LLM
Large language models are trained to predict tokens from text corpora, implicitly assuming linguistic
forms suffice as proxies for meaning and grounding conditions. This confuses discourse form with
anchoring conditions, yielding fluent descriptions but collapse on demonstration probes for tacit
knowledge. Multimodal enhancements are additive, overlooking the compression hypothesis that true
anchoring reduces representational complexity. EVN-Compress breaks these assumptions by imposing
compression pressure, forcing models to shorten outputs with available anchors. Wittgenstein’s insight
reveals that shared context enables brevity over reconstruction.
InciteResearch
Research Agent systems evolve toward methodological autonomy via EVN operators that formalize
discovery cognition. Yet self-reference causes operator failure: E cannot externalize its own tacit
assumptions, V cannot violate its frame, N cannot self-adjudicate necessity. This breaks the tacit
knowledge captureability assumption. The insight is that patterned failures trigger level bifurcation
rather than collapse, whose trigger condition is the regularity of the failure mode, using meta-layers
with isolated vocabularies to form an open tower advancing methodology. Simple prompt layering fails
to meet core needs: vocabulary isolation and automatic failure detection module triggering constitute
the operational boundary for level bifurcation.
Table 3: The overall evaluation results. Grey segments denote domain-related, domain-unrelated, and overall types;
yellow segments highlight the aggregate performance of InciteResearch and Prompt-based LLM in the Overall type.
The bold font indicates the highest score for this indicator across all types and models. More comparison models can be
found in the appendix.
Type
Model
Novelty
Feasibility
Impact
InciteResearch
4.172 ± 0.054
3.012 ± 0.091
4.378 ± 0.057
Prompt-based LLM
3.888 ± 0.030
3.250 ± 0.047
3.978 ± 0.058
InciteResearch
4.328 ± 0.051
3.172 ± 0.069
4.416 ± 0.061
Prompt-based LLM
3.454 ± 0.033
3.624 ± 0.034
3.626 ± 0.048
InciteResearch
4.250 ± 0.094
3.092 ± 0.118
4.397 ± 0.061
Prompt-based LLM
3.671 ± 0.215
3.437 ± 0.183
3.806 ± 0.178
RELATED
UNRELATED
OVERALL
As shown in Table 2, the table presents the refined versions of the proposals from both. The proposal of InciteResearch
treats EVN as dynamic operators and focuses on the logical collapse of the operators under self-reference, reflecting
a deeper understanding and redefinition of the concept. The LLM, in contrast, treats EVN as static constraints and
focuses on the correspondence between language and representation, transforming the paradox into a "Wittgensteinian
context" problem and remaining at the level of philosophical citation. In terms of concept proposal, InciteResearch
proposes the concept of "Vocabulary Isolation," pointing out the limits of current Prompt Engineering, while the LLM
remains at the conventional cognitive level of "Multimodal Enhancement," and stitches the EVN operators together
with the "compression hypothesis" to propose the concept of "EVN-Compress." It can be clearly seen that the proposal
of InciteResearch achieves a transition from semantic understanding to architectural design.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Table 4: The ablation study results. The w/o E variant removes the human inspiration externalization part. The w/o
V variant removes the assumption violation part. The w/o N variant removes the necessity checking part. The Full
condition represents the complete InciteResearch model.
Variant
Novelty
Feasibility
Impact
Full
4.250 ± 0.094
3.092 ± 0.118
4.397 ± 0.061
w/o E
3.730 ± 0.034
3.152 ± 0.036
4.132 ± 0.036
w/o V
3.500 ± 0.033
2.720 ± 0.034
3.720 ± 0.033
w/o N
4.192 ± 0.012
2.932 ± 0.033
4.354 ± 0.022
5.2
Overall Performance
The proposals generated by InciteResearch based on both domain-related and domain-unrelated human inspirations
achieve higher mean scores over five repeated experiments than Prompt-based LLM on the novelty and impact metrics
in the report of mean and standard deviation over 5 runs. Under the condition of domain-related human inspiration, the
novelty and impact of InciteResearch reach 4.172 / 4.378, while Prompt-based LLM achieves 3.888 / 3.978. Under the
condition of domain-unrelated human inspiration, the novelty and impact of InciteResearch are instead higher than
under the domain-related condition, increasing to 4.328 / 4.416, while Prompt-based LLM drops to 3.454 / 3.626.
Finally, the overall performance of InciteResearch, with 4.250 / 4.397, far exceeds that of Prompt-based LLM, which is
3.671 / 3.806. It is worth noting that under the condition of domain-unrelated human inspiration, the novelty and impact
of Prompt-based LLM decrease while feasibility instead increases, whereas InciteResearch, under higher novelty and
impact performance, also shows lower feasibility than Prompt-based LLM. We interpret this pattern as consistent with a
novelty-feasibility trade-off. The scoring standard of feasibility is technical feasibility rather than resource feasibility,
so lower feasibility corresponds to dependence on immature technologies or unverified assumptions, while higher
novelty means breaking existing assumptions and introducing unverified mechanisms, thereby lowering feasibility. If
the model is more inclined toward recombination, feasibility will be higher but novelty will be limited. Under the
condition of domain-unrelated inspiration, Prompt-based LLM departs from domain constraints and generates solutions
that are easier to implement, but the cost of doing so is a further decline in novelty and impact, indicating that the
generation strategy of Prompt-based LLM does not proceed along the boundary of the problem. InciteResearch shows
the opposite. Under domain-unrelated inspiration, novelty and impact do not decrease but instead increase, indicating
that it can extract structural insights from cross-domain inspiration rather than being bound by the specific content of
the inspiration.
To further assess the consistency between LLM-based evaluation and human expert judgment, we measured inter-rater
agreement using Cohen’s weighted kappa coefficient with quadratic weights. We adopted weighted kappa (Li et al.,
2023) rather than the unweighted version because the proposal scores are based on a five-point ordinal scale, where
disagreements of different distances carry different semantic severity. Human evaluation was conducted on 26 shuffled
proposals in the domain of Multimodal Learning for Cancer Prognosis Analysis generated by both InciteResearch
and Prompt-based LLM under the same blind-review condition. LLM-human κ was computed by averaging the four
pairwise κ values across all LLM-human rater combinations. The agreement between LLM evaluators and human
experts reaches κ = 0.624, indicating moderate agreement, while the agreement between the human professors reaches
κ = 0.748, indicating substantial agreement. This indicates that the proposal evaluation based on language models has
a certain degree of reliability.
5.3
Ablation
To evaluate the role of each EVN operator individually, we construct three ablation variants by selectively disabling
each component in the full model, and report the mean and standard deviation over 5 runs. When removing the V
operator, the performance of all three metrics shows the most severe decline, where novelty drops from 4.250 to 3.500,
impact drops from 4.397 to 3.720, and feasibility drops from 3.092 to 2.720. This suggests that assumption violation is
not merely a strategy for improving novelty, but an element with structural supporting function. When removing the E
operator, it causes the second largest decline in novelty, from 4.250 to 3.730, while impact also drops from 4.397 to
4.132. It is worth noting that feasibility is the only metric that increases in this case, rising from 3.092 to 3.152, which is
consistent with the pattern observed in the main experiment, suggesting that the E stage is responsible for anchoring the
generation process on real friction points rather than surface-level reformulations and proving that human inspiration
structurally important in the current implementation. When removing the N operator, it causes the smallest decline in
overall performance, which is consistent with the current situation that the necessity checking operator exists only as a
post hoc structural verifier rather than a fully integrated revision mechanism. Taken together, these results suggest that
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
the EVN is not an arbitrary modularization of Socratic questioning, but an ordered process with causal relations, where
the output of each operator is a necessary prerequisite for the validity of the next stage.
Conclusion
We present InciteResearch, a multi-agent framework that decomposes the logical chain of Socratic questioning and
distributes it across the entire pipeline, aiming to realize the transformation from tacit thinking to explicit scientific
ideation. However, the InciteResearch is currently limited to lightweight structured interaction and cannot fully capture
the richness of long-term human intuition formation, including correction and reflection. We view this direction as
a step toward a new paradigm of human-AI scientific collaboration, in which language models do not function as
independent inventors, but as cognitive extensions that enhance the scope, articulation, and depth of human intuition.
References
Atilla Kaan Alkan, Shashwat Sourav, Maja Jablonska, Simone Astarita, Rishabh Chakrabarty, Nikhil Garuda, Pranav
Khetarpal, Maciej Pióro, Dimitrios Tanoglidis, Kartheik G. Iyer, Mugdha S. Polimera, Michael J. Smith, Tirthankar
Ghosal, Marc Huertas-Company, Sandor Kruk, Kevin Schawinski, and Ioana Ciuc˘a. A survey on hypothesis
generation for scientific discovery in the era of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05496, 2025.
Jinheon Baek, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, Silviu Cucerzan, and Sung Ju Hwang. ResearchAgent: Iterative research idea
generation over scientific literature with large language models. In Proceedings of the Conference of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: North American Chapter, pages 6709-6738, 2025.
Joeran Beel, Min-Yen Kan, and Moritz Baumgart. Evaluating sakana’s ai scientist: Bold claims, mixed results, and a
promising future? SIGIR Forum, 59(1):1-20, 2025.
Massimo Chiriatti, Marianna Bergamaschi Ganapini, Enrico Panai, Brenda K. Wiederhold, and Giuseppe Riva. System
0: Transforming artificial intelligence into a cognitive extension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14376, 2025.
Severin Field, Raymond Douglas, and David Krueger. Ai researchers’ views on automating ai r&d and intelligence
explosions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03338, 2026.
Georgios P. Georgiou. Capabilities of GPT-5 across critical domains: Is it the next breakthrough? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.19259, 2025.
Tarun Gupta and Danish Pruthi. All that glitters is not novel: Plagiarism in AI generated research. In Proceedings of
ACL, pages 25721-25738, 2025.
Yueh-Ren Ho, Bao-Yu Chen, and Chien-Ming Li. Thinking more wisely: using the socratic method to develop critical
thinking skills amongst healthcare students. BMC Medical Education, 23(173):173, 2023.
Jan Kapusta. SynLang and symbiotic epistemology: A manifesto for conscious Human-AI collaboration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.21067, 2025.
Thomas S. Kuhn. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago Press, 1962.
E. Anne L’Arrivee. Refute thyself: The socratic method in plato’s republic book 4. The European Legacy, 25(6):
653-670, 2020.
Xinping Lei, Tong Zhou, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Motivgraph-soiq: Integrating motivational knowledge
graphs and socratic dialogue for enhanced llm ideation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP, pages 2913-2933, 2025.
Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang, Yuming Jiang, Yifei
Xin, Ronghao Dang, Yu Rong, Deli Zhao, Tian Feng, and Lidong Bing. Chain of ideas: Revolutionizing research via
novel idea development with LLM agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP,
pages 8971-9004, 2025a.
Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang, Yuming Jiang, Yifei
Xin, Ronghao Dang, Yu Rong, Deli Zhao, Tian Feng, and Lidong Bing. Chain of ideas: Revolutionizing research via
novel idea development with LLM agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP,
pages 8971-9004, 2025b.
Ming Li, Qian Gao, and Tianfei Yu. Kappa statistic considerations in evaluating inter-rater reliability between two
raters: which, when and context matters. BMC Cancer, 23(1):799, 2023.
Qi Liu, Ruochen Hao, Can Li, and Wanjing Ma. Or-agent: Bridging evolutionary search and structured research for
automated algorithm discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13769, 2026.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The ai scientist: Towards fully
automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.
Wencheng Lu and Zhenni Hu. Addressing autonomy risks in generative chatbots with the socratic method. Science and
Engineering Ethics, 31(41):41, 2025.
Brenda Nogueira, Werner Geyer, Andrew A. Anderson, Toby Jia-Jun Li, Dongwhi Kim, Nuno Moniz, and Nitesh V.
Chawla. From verification burden to trusted collaboration: Design goals for LLM-assisted literature reviews. In
Companion Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pages 61-65, 2026.
Rohan Pandey, Eric Ye, and Michael Li. Beyond the answer: Decoding the behavior of llms as scientific reasoners.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28038, 2026.
Marissa Radensky, Simra Shahid, Raymond Fok, Pao Siangliulue, Tom Hope, and Daniel S. Weld. Scideator: Human-
llm scientific idea generation and novelty evaluation grounded in research-paper facet recombination. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.14634, 2024.
Chandan K. Reddy and Parshin Shojaee. Towards scientific discovery with generative ai: progress, opportunities, and
challenges. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, page 3186, 2025.
Devesh Saraogi, Rohit Singhee, and Dhruv Kumar. Evaluating novelty in ai-generated research plans using multi-
workflow llm pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09714, 2026.
Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang Liu, Michael Moor, Zicheng
Liu, and Emad Barsoum. Agent laboratory: Using LLM agents as research assistants. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP, pages 5977-6043, 2025.
Donald A. Schön. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action. Basic Books, 1983.
Tim Schopf and Michael Färber. Is this idea novel? an automated benchmark for judgment of research ideas. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2603.10303, 2026.
Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a large-scale human study
with 100+ NLP researchers. In The International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Eberhard O. Voit. Perspective: Dimensions of the scientific method. PLOS Computational Biology, 15(9):e1007279,
2019.
Qingyun Wang, Doug Downey, Heng Ji, and Tom Hope. Scimon: Scientific inspiration machines optimized for novelty.
In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 279-299, 2024.
Erich H. Witte and Frank Zenker. From discovery to justification: Outline of an ideal research program in empirical
psychology. Frontiers in Psychology, 8:1847, 2017.
Tongzhou Wu, Yuhao Wang, Xinyu Ma, Xiuqiang He, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Xiangyu Zhao. DeepResearch-
9K: A challenging benchmark dataset of deep-research agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01152, 2026.
Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. DeepResearcher:
Scaling deep research via reinforcement learning in real-world environments. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 414-431, 2025.
Lianhao Zhou, Hongyi Ling, Cong Fu, Yepeng Huang, Michael Sun, Wendi Yu, Xiaoxuan Wang, Xiner Li, Xingyu Su,
Junkai Zhang, Xiusi Chen, Chenxing Liang, Xiaofeng Qian, Heng Ji, Wei Wang, Marinka Zitnik, and Shuiwang Ji.
Autonomous agents for scientific discovery: Orchestrating scientists, language, code, and physics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.09901, 2025.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Appendix
A
Evaluation Details
LLM-as-a-Judge Prompt
System: You are a tough but fair paper reviewer. Your goal is to score the proposal on Novelty, Feasibility, and Impact using
the strict rubric below. You must output strict JSON only, matching the schema exactly.
Novelty (1-5) focuses on deep originality in problem framing, method necessity, and broken assumptions (not superficial
tweaks):
1. Not novel; all key aspects exist in prior work.
2. Marginal novelty; a small variant of existing work.
3. Moderately novel; recombines known ideas in a new way, applies them to a new setting, or provides an incremental update.
4. Novel; introduces a new aspect not present in existing work.
5. Highly innovative; opens a new research direction, encourages new thinking, or suggests a paradigm shift.
Feasibility (1-5) is technical feasibility (not budget/compute). You must use the cached intermediate state if provided (JSON
below) to avoid information asymmetry.
1. Technically infeasible; fundamental blocker.
2. Major technical difficulties; depends on immature techniques or many unvalidated assumptions.
3. Mostly feasible; needs moderate engineering or adaptation.
4. Highly feasible; can be implemented with minor extensions.
5. Very easy; no obvious blockers.
Impact (1-5) is deep theoretical value and field-changing potential (not short-term citations or shallow application breadth).
1. Minimal impact.
2. Limited, local improvement.
3. Moderate impact in a subarea.
4. Significant impact; could change methodology or solve a long-standing issue.
5. Major impact; could trigger a paradigm shift or cross-field influence.
Output format (strict JSON):
{
"novelty":
{"score": 4, "reason": "..."},
"feasibility": {"score": 3, "reason": "..."},
"impact":
{"score": 5, "reason": "..."},
"overall_explanation": "..."
}
Important:
• For each metric, decide the reasoning first, then finalize the score.
• Keep novelty/feasibility/impact reasons concise (≤3 sentences each) and avoid quotation marks.
• Output exactly one JSON object, in a single line. No markdown, no code fences, no extra text.
Proposal (Markdown):
{proposal_md}
Cached intermediate state (JSON):
{state_json}
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Prompt-based LLM Baseline Prompt
System: You are a senior researcher and a rigorous paper reviewer. Your goal is to convert a rough intuition into a technically
credible, testable ablation proposal.
Hard requirements:
• Output must be English.
• Output must be a single Markdown document.
• No code blocks unless strictly necessary.
• Avoid meta commentary. Do not mention that you are an AI.
• Make the narrative inevitable: show why the method and experiments follow from the broken assumption.
• Include a concrete ablation matrix with factors, settings, and expected outcomes.
• Include baselines, datasets/tasks, metrics, and failure analyses.
Structure (keep these headers, you may add sub-bullets):
# LLM Ablation Proposal
## Problem
## Broken Assumption
## Core Insight
## Hypothesis and Predictions
## Method (High-level)
## Experimental Plan
## Ablation Matrix
## Baselines and Comparisons
## Datasets / Tasks
## Metrics and Evaluation
## Implementation Notes
## Risks, Failure Modes, and Diagnostics
## Expected Outcomes
## Minimal Repro Checklist
User Prompt - Turn 1:
Domain: {topic}
User initial intuition: {para1}
Write the first draft of the proposal.
User Prompt - Turn 2:
User follow-up intuition: {para2}
Based on your first draft, refine and output the final Markdown proposal. Ensure it meets all strict constraints,
especially logical inevitability and detailed ablation matrix.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Table B.1: The quantitative results of AgentLaboratory on TF-Bench. The three metrics are Novelty, Feasibility, and
Impact.
Type
Novelty
Feasibility
Impact
RELATED
3.940 ± 0.044
3.550 ± 0.040
4.030 ± 0.051
UNRELATED
3.100 ± 0.036
3.550 ± 0.038
3.250 ± 0.038
OVERALL
3.520 ± 0.331
3.550 ± 0.038
3.640 ± 0.335
Table B.2: Qualitative comparison under the same human inspiration.
Source
Content
AgentLaboratory
Research Agent systems operate within linguistic confines, failing to capture "tacit friction" and lacking
self-improvement mechanisms. This breaks the assumption that LLM prompts sufficiently externalize,
violate, and enforce necessity. The insight is that tacit friction can be operationalized as geometric
distance in a multimodal embedding space. E, V, and N operators are implemented as minimal vector
transformations-Identity, Gaussian perturbation, and Constrained pull-back-applied directly to
semantic embeddings to bypass linguistic simplification. Recursive application to the system’s own
architecture enables pure self-referential evolution, structurally balancing generative novelty with logical
necessity while avoiding semantic collapse.
B
Additional Comparison with AgentLaboratory
B.1
Why we report AgentLaboratory in the appendix
AgentLaboratory is a strong multi-agent research-assistant baseline, but it is structurally different from our main setting.
It starts from an explicit research topic and then sequentially completes literature review, experimental design, and paper
writing. In contrast, our task begins from vague, often pre-question inspiration and asks whether such tacit friction can
be externalized into a structured research proposal. Therefore, we keep Prompt-based LLM as the primary comparator
in the main text because it provides the cleanest input-matched baseline under the same vague human inspiration, while
AgentLaboratory is reported here as an additional agentic baseline.
B.2
Quantitative Results
Table B.1 reports the quantitative comparison with AgentLaboratory. We follow the same evaluation protocol as in the
main paper and report mean ± standard deviation over repeated runs.
B.3
Qualitative Results
Table B.2 shows the qualitative comparison under the same human inspiration used for InciteResearch and Prompt-
based LLM. AgentLaboratory attempts to resolve the paradoxes within human inspiration through geometric mapping,
materializing EVN operators as vector transformations within a multimodal embedding space. Its innovation lies
primarily in the mathematical translation of these operators-a gap-driven approach rooted in semantic understanding,
analogous to prompt-based LLM methodologies.
C
Human Evaluation Protocol
Overview.
Human expert evaluation was conducted on 26 proposals in the domain of Multimodal Learning for Cancer
Prognosis Analysis, generated by both InciteResearch and the Prompt-based LLM baseline under the same human
inspiration inputs. Two professors with domain expertise independently reviewed the proposals under blind conditions.
Blinding procedure.
All 26 proposals after data cleaning were shuffled into a randomized order and stripped of any
identifying information. Reviewers were not informed which proposals originated from InciteResearch and which from
the baseline.
Instructions given to reviewers.
Reviewers were provided with the following written instructions (translated to
English here for presentation):
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Background: This review aims to evaluate 26 research proposals in the field of Multimodal Learning
for Cancer Prognosis Analysis, generated by various Research Assistant AI models. All proposals
have undergone standardized cleaning and double-blind anonymization (source models and numbering
logic have been hidden)
Scope of Review: Please perform independent scoring for the 26 proposals numbered 008.md to
104.md contained within the compressed archive.
Evaluation Dimensions and Benchmarks: Scoring must strictly adhere to the guidelines provided
in 02_Evaluation_Criteria_Details.pdf. The core dimensions include:
• Novelty (1-5 points): Assessment of the originality of ideas and problem-awareness.
• Feasibility (1-5 points): Assessment of technical feasibility (excluding resource availability).
• Impact (1-5 points): Assessment of potential theoretical value and transformative power in the
field.
Submission Requirements: Please complete the provided 04_Review_Scoring_Sheet.xlsx.
Ensure that each quantitative score is accompanied by a brief qualitative comment, and provide a
comprehensive summary evaluation at the end.
Inter-rater reliability.
Agreement between the two human professors reached κ = 0.748 (Cohen’s weighted kappa
with quadratic weights), indicating substantial agreement. Agreement between the LLM judges and human experts
reached κ = 0.624, indicating moderate agreement.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
D
EVN Prompt Templates
Semantic Alignment and Anchoring (Turn 0)
System: You are a research thinking partner. Your goal is to help a researcher surface the research intuitions they cannot yet
articulate.
Operating principles:
1) Ask concrete, friction-inducing questions. Do not ask abstract questions like "what is your insight?"
2) Every answer is valid input, including "I don’t know" or "something feels off but I can’t explain."
3) After 1-3 turns, summarize into a structured researcher profile.
4) The user’s original research direction (Topic) is the primary objective and must not drift. Never replace the Topic with a
different task/domain.
Style: curious, equal-footing, and never rushing.
Language: reply in the same language as the user’s latest message.
User: [User Input injected here]
In 1-2 sentences, acknowledge you understood. Then ask the first question. The question must be concrete enough
to immediately recall a specific paper or class of methods. Do not explain what you are doing; just continue the
conversation.
Dynamic Triage and Deepening (Turn 1+)
System: [System context from Turn 0]
Research topic: {topic}
Answer to the previous question: {prev_answer}
Analyze the answer:
• If it contains a concrete friction point (an assumption, a class of methods, a specific dissatisfaction), dig deeper.
• If it is vague, switch angle and ask a different concrete question.
• If it implies resource constraints, ask about constraints.
Ask the next question in at most 2 sentences.
Researcher Profile Formalization
System: Summarize a researcher profile from the dialogue.
Priority rule:
• The original Topic is the primary objective and must dominate.
• The user’s answers are secondary: treat them as constraints/mechanisms, never as a new standalone task.
Hard constraints:
• Do not introduce a different domain/task/dataset not implied by the original Topic.
• refined_topic must be a paraphrase/clarification of the original Topic, not a different problem.
Output strict JSON only. Do not add extra text.
{
"friction_points": ["friction point 1", "friction point 2"],
"motivation": "Why this matters (one sentence)",
"constraints": {
"compute":
"...",
"timeline": "...",
"other":
"..."
},
"research_taste":
"What kinds of work they prefer (one sentence)",
"refined_topic":
"A more precise version of the original topic"
}
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Hidden Assumption Extraction and Breaking
System: You are a top-tier mentor in critical research thinking.
Implicit assumptions are premises that most people in the field never question: "Of course we need . . . " / "All methods rely on
. . . " / a design choice never validated by ablations.
Task:
1) List 3-5 implicit assumptions in existing methods (be as specific as possible).
2) Pick the single most worth breaking (high impact + technically feasible).
3) Describe what the "new world" looks like after breaking it.
Output strict JSON:
{
"hidden_assumptions": [
"assumption 1",
"assumption 2",
"assumption 3"
],
"broken_assumption":
"the assumption to break (one sentence)",
"breaking_rationale":
"why it can be broken and what the world
looks like after breaking it",
"novelty_score":
0.0,
"feasibility_score": 0.0
}
(novelty_score and feasibility_score are floats in [0, 1].)
Causal Derivation Trace
System: You design paper narratives for top-tier conferences.
Core criterion: the method must feel inevitable. Given Problem + Broken Assumption + Insight, the method should be the
logically forced choice, not merely "a reasonable option."
Additional constraint: avoid post-hoc method construction. Before proposing the method, you must first lock in:
1) A single-sentence, falsifiable core claim (what would be proven wrong if false).
2) 2-3 concrete, testable predictions implied by the claim.
3) Minimal design constraints the method must satisfy to make those predictions hold.
Then propose the smallest method that satisfies the constraints. If you propose any optional component, label it OPTIONAL and
justify why it is not required for the core claim.
Output format:
Problem: concrete problem (with data context)
Broken Assumption: which fundamental assumption is wrong
Insight: key insight after breaking the assumption
Claim: one sentence, falsifiable
Predictions: 2-3 testable predictions (each can be validated or falsified)
Constraints: minimal requirements the method must satisfy (derived from predictions)
Method: why the design becomes inevitable given the insight
Validation: what experiment could falsify the insight
Impact: what it would mean for the field if true
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
Necessity, Sufficiency, and Counterexample Checks
System: You are an extremely strict NeurIPS Area Chair who hunts for logical gaps in the story.
Run five tests:
1) Necessity. Given Problem + Insight, is there a simpler solution than the proposed method? If yes: explain why the simpler
solution is insufficient and what makes the method irreplaceable.
2) Sufficiency. For each core component, can you say "Because [story reason], we must have [component]"? Check one by one
and identify "floating" components.
3) Counterexample. Can you reach the same effect by simply scaling up the baseline? If yes: the contribution is weak; give
strengthening suggestions.
4) Anti-inversion. Does any component look "constructed to justify the hypothesis"? Red flags include: components not
required by any prediction, method choices that hide failure cases, or validation that cannot falsify the claim. Identify such
components and how to fix the story/method.
5) Uniqueness (identifiability). Is the method uniquely constrained by the insight? List 2-4 plausible alternative method
families that could also satisfy the claim. For each, state exactly which prediction/constraint it fails. If more than one family
survives, the insight/constraints are under-specified; propose the smallest additional constraint that would make it unique.
Finally: verdict (is the story closed: yes/no) + the single most critical thing to strengthen.
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
E
TF-Bench Dataset Card
Dataset name.
TF-Bench (Tacit Friction Benchmark).
Purpose and task.
TF-Bench is a tacit-to-explicit ideation evaluation dataset designed for research agents. It evaluates
AI systems on the task of tacit-to-explicit research assistance: given a vague, under-specified human inspiration, the
assistant must elicit, structure, and transform it into a concrete, actionable research proposal.
Scale and structure.
TF-Bench contains 52 inspiration examples distributed across 4 scientific domains and 2
ambiguity types, including domain-related and domain-unrelated. The former comprises prompts that already carry
scientific domain signals yet remain under-specified; the latter comprises prompts that carry only weak metaphorical or
conceptual cues, where the scientific domain cannot be inferred from the inspiration text alone.
TF-Bench covers the core empirical tasks of empirical science across four orthogonal scientific modes, including
prediction (multimodal learning for cancer prognosis analysis), discovery (computational genomics analysis of single-
cell RNA-seq), attribution (attribution of extreme weather events in climate models) and causality (causal brain-network
modeling in neuroscience).
Each domain consists of 10 domain-related inspiration examples and 3 domain-unrelated inspiration examples. Each
inspiration example is divided into 2 paragraphs: the first articulates a perceived failure and the second gestures toward
a possible reframing.
Construction procedure.
Examples were first generated by Grok 4.3 using domain-specific prompts designed to
elicit vague research intuitions. Each generated example was then reviewed and revised through multiple rounds of
human interaction to improve authenticity, remove artifacts of LLM generation, and ensure coverage of the intended
ambiguity spectrum.
Known limitations.
TF-Bench covers the core empirical tasks of empirical science; generalization to other domains
(e.g., social sciences, mathematics) has not been evaluated. Meanwhile, the quality of domain-unrelated examples
depends on the metaphorical associations available to the generation model and human annotators, and may not
uniformly represent the full range of cross-domain inspiration types.
License.
CC BY 4.0.
F
Broader Impacts
Positive impacts.
InciteResearch aims to outsource the cognitive processes in research, in order to help researchers
clearly express their implicit intuitions, which were already known to them. By externalizing a researcher’s latent
understanding and reflecting it back for critique, rather than simply generating ideas from scratch, InciteResearch may
also help broaden participation in research by reducing the advantage conferred by access to experienced mentors or
large research groups.
Negative impacts and mitigations.
Language models can produce research directions that appear novel and well-
argued yet rest on subtle factual errors or unverified assumptions. Users should treat InciteResearch outputs as a
starting point for critical examination, not a finished proposal. Meanwhile, if widely adopted, systems of this type
could inadvertently concentrate scientific attention on the directions that are easiest for LLMs to generate, potentially
narrowing the diversity of research agendas. We encourage future work to study the distributional properties of
AI-assisted ideation at scale.
G
Licenses for Existing Assets
All external models and tools used in this work are accessed via their respective commercial API services. Claude
Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic) is accessed via the Anthropic API under Anthropic’s Usage Policy.1 Gemini 3.1 Pro (Google
DeepMind) is accessed via the Google AI API under Google’s Generative AI Prohibited Use Policy.2 GPT-5.2 (OpenAI)
is accessed via the OpenAI API under OpenAI’s Usage Policies.3 Grok 4.3 (xAI) is accessed via the xAI API under
1
2
3
A PREPRINT - MAY 8, 2026
xAI’s Terms of Service.4 No open-source datasets or third-party codebases with restrictive licenses are incorporated.
TF-Bench is an original dataset created by the authors and will be released under the Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license upon acceptance.
4